
Spring 2024


            ASTR 8500 PRESENTATION EVALUATION METHOD
            ----------------------------------------

  Students in the audience during other students' presentations are
  asked to act as evaluators, providing helpful written guidance and
  comments on each talk that the speakers can use to improve their
  future presentations.

  We ask that all of the audience members evaluate each speaker using
  a standard form, appended below, and submit the evaluations to us.
  We will forward the consolidated set of the (anonymous but verbatim)
  evaluations to each speaker.

  The same rubric will be used for the optional topic presentations
  during the last three weeks of the semester.

  During each class meeting, we will supply you with paper copies of the
  attached form.  Fill them out and turn them in to us.

  The instructions for the evaluations are printed on the form, but
  to alert you to the format, we are repeating those here:

      You are asked to provide each presenter with a useful and
      constructive assessment of their presentation. For each
      presenter, you should record something they are not doing that
      they should START doing, something they are doing that they
      should STOP doing, and something that they did well and should
      CONTINUE doing. There is a comments section for more extended
      discussion.

      You should supply at least one item under each heading, but you
      are encouraged to list as many as are relevant. The more
      feedback you can provide to each speaker, the better.

      Here's a list of the various items that might factor in to your
      evaluations:

          o Content
          o Organization
          o Overall clarity
          o Overall interest
          o Manner/stage presence
          o Speaking voice (level, intelligibility, modulation)
          o Engagement with audience (including humor)
          o Quality/usefulness of projected material
              o Amount/density
              o Conceptual clarity
              o Readability
              o Design/Aesthetics
              o Overall effectiveness
          o Quality/usefulness of board entries
          o Use of other audio/visual aids (microphone, pointer, etc)
          o Pacing (including meeting the time limit)
          o Dealing with questions
          o Good or bad habits

--------------------------------------------------------------------

