


-----------------------------------------------------------------
 COMPILATION OF ARTICLES ON SCIENCE BUDGET CUTS AND NEW POLICIES
         BY THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION  [R.W. O'Connell]
-----------------------------------------------------------------



11/12/24: FYI.  Subject: This Week: Seismic changes ahead for science
policy post-election / UN looks to research nuclear war impacts /
Trust in science survey up for review

SEISMIC CHANGES AHEAD FOR SCIENCE POLICY UNDER SECOND TRUMP PRESIDENCY

Although science policy was not a focal point of the 2024 campaign,
the reelection of Donald Trump as president will have far-reaching
consequences for the research enterprise. Among the most imminent
changes are that diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives will
come under immediate pressure. On day one of his new administration,
Trump has pledged to revoke Biden’s executive order prioritizing DEI
programs, which science agencies had pointed to as a basis for
expanding efforts to diversify the STEM workforce. Trump has also
already announced various senior personnel who have an adversarial
view toward DEI initiatives, such as Stephen Miller, who will be his
deputy chief of staff for policy. Miller’s legal advocacy group issued
FOIA requests to various science agencies last month to probe their
diversity programs.

Visa policy changes affecting scientists and students could also be in
store.  Although Trump’s campaign speeches focused on his proposals
for curbing illegal immigration, he has also pledged to use visa
policy as a tool of research security. In a campaign video on
“stopping Chinese espionage,” Trump said he will “impose whatever visa
sanctions and travel restrictions are necessary to shut off Chinese
access to American secrets.” More broadly, research security is poised
to be a topic of intense focus during his administration. Many people
Trump has already picked or eyed for top roles are known for having a
deep interest in the subject, including Rep. Michael Waltz (R-FL), who
will be his national security advisor; Rep. Elise Stefanik (R-NY), his
nominee for U.S.  ambassador to the United Nations; and Sen. Marco
Rubio (R-FL), reportedly his choice for secretary of state.

The outlook for science budgets is less clear. In his first term Trump
prioritized spending on research tied to “industries of the future” but
nevertheless proposed sweeping budget cuts to science agencies as part of a
broader drive to reduce government spending. Since Trump ultimately did not
insist on tight budget caps during the negotiations, Congress rejected his
proposals for cuts and was even able to significantly expand some science
agencies. Yet Trump appears interested again in cutting government spending,
promising to task technology executive Elon Musk with identifying ideas for
cuts. Trump may also attempt to roll back some of President Joe Biden’s
signature spending initiatives, such as the energy technology subsidies in the
Inflation Reduction Act and the semiconductor industry subsidies in the CHIPS
and Science Act. However, many of the programs created by those acts have
bipartisan backing in Congress.

CONGRESS RETURNS WITH NEXT YEAR FRONT OF MIND

Congress is back in session this week after a seven-week break for the election.
At this point, votes are still being tallied to determine which party will take
control of the House when President-elect Donald Trump takes office for a second
term in January 2025. It is already clear, however, that Republicans will take
control of the Senate, meaning that Trump should be able to get his top
political appointees confirmed without Democratic support. Republicans may also
push to delay finalizing the fiscal year 2025 budget until Trump takes office,
hoping for greater influence over final appropriations. If Republicans take
control of both the House and the Senate, Trump can use an expedited process
known as reconciliation for certain types of legislation. 

Republicans may look to strengthen the R&D tax credit available to
businesses as part of a broader overhaul of the tax code. The 2017 tax
reform law signed by Trump weakened the R&D tax credit, but Republican
lawmakers have proposed to reverse that move.

The composition of key congressional committees could look very different next
year, with several high-profile changes set to occur. On the Senate Commerce,
Science, and Transportation Committee, for example, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) looks
likely to take over as chair. Cruz has been highly critical of the Biden
administration’s focus on diversity, equity, and inclusion, and recently
published a report slamming the National Science Foundation for funding
diversity initiatives. The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee will
also see new leadership following the retirement of its chair, Sen. Joe Manchin
(I-WV). The committee’s top Republican, Sen. John Barrasso (R-WY), may also
depart the panel to serve in a leadership role in his party’s caucus. In the
House, the ranking member of the Commerce-Justice-Science Appropriations
Subcommittee, Rep. Matt Cartwright (D-PA), lost his seat, as did the chair of
the Energy Subcommittee of the House Science Committee, Rep. Brandon Williams
(R-NY). On the House Energy-Water Appropriations Subcommittee, ranking member
Rep. Marcy Kaptur (D-OH), looks set to hang on to her seat despite a very close
race, which AP has yet to officially call.

AAAS HOLDING EVENTS ON TRUST IN SCIENCE

The American Association for the Advancement of Science will host an event
Thursday to discuss the release of the latest Trust In Science survey from the
Pew Research Center. The past four editions of the survey have reported declines
in the number of Americans who view science as having a positive effect on
society and increases in the percentage who have a negative view of science.
AAAS will also host a meeting of the Science and Human Rights Coalition Thursday
and Friday that will focus on “building a culture of trustworthy science.” The
event will review “strategies for elevating and promoting science that is
civically engaged, and giving scientists the tools, resources, and support they
need to carry out that work.”

ALSO ON OUR RADAR

 *  The House Oversight and Accountability Committee will hold a hearing
    Wednesday on unidentified anomalous phenomena, an umbrella term for aerial,
    undersea, or transmedium objects of unknown origin. The hearing will attempt
    to shed light on government research programs and findings concerning UAP,
    according to a press release. Witnesses include Timothy Gallaudet, a naval
    oceanographer and former acting NOAA administrator, and Michael Gold, a
    former top NASA official who was a member of a recent NASA study on the
    topic.
 *  NIH’s Scientific Management Review Board will meet Tuesday for the first
    time since 2015 to discuss NIH’s mission, structure, and budget. The
    dormancy of the board was the subject of a probe by House Republicans in
    2023.
 *  MIT planetary geophysicist Maria Zuber has replaced former NASA
    Administrator Jim Bridenstine as the chair of NASA’s Mars Sample Return
    review team. The team’s report recommending a new architecture for the
    mission is still expected by the end of this year.
 *  British physicist Mark Thomson was selected last week as the next
    director-general of CERN, Europe’s leading particle physics lab. His term
    starts in 2026.



1/17/25: NYT.  Kennedy Sought to Stop Covid Vaccinations 6 Months
     After Rollout / Robert F. Kennedy Jr. petitioned the F.D.A. to
     revoke authorization of the shots at a time when they were in high
     demand and considered life-saving.

 Robert F. Kennedy Jr., President-elect Donald J. Trump’s choice to lead
 the nation’s health agencies, formally asked the Food and Drug
 Administration to revoke the authorization of all Covid vaccines during
 a deadly phase of the pandemic when thousands of Americans were still
 dying every week.

 Mr. Kennedy filed a petition with the F.D.A. in May 2021 demanding
 that officials rescind authorization for the shots and refrain from
 approving any Covid vaccine in the future.

 Estimates had begun to show that the rapid rollout of Covid vaccines
 had already saved about 140,000 lives in the United States.

 The petition was filed on behalf of the nonprofit that Mr. Kennedy
 founded and led, Children’s Health Defense. It claimed that the risks
 of the vaccines outweighed the benefits and that the vaccines weren’t
 necessary because good treatments were available, including ivermectin
 and hydroxychloroquine, which had already been deemed ineffective
 against the virus.

 ...John Moore, a professor of immunology at Weill Cornell Medical College,
 called Mr. Kennedy’s request to the F.D.A. “AN APPALLING ERROR OF
 JUDGMENT.” Gregg Gonsalves, an epidemiologist at the Yale School of
 Public Health, likened having Mr. Kennedy lead the federal health
 agencies to “putting a flat earther in charge of NASA.”

 ,,,At the time Mr. Kennedy challenged the Covid vaccines, some of his
 objections touched on wider concerns about their rapid development.
 Emergency-use authorization — a preliminary form of approval — for
 immunizations was unusual. Others argued that a public health emergency
 dictated a speedier rollout.

 Dr. Jennifer Nuzzo, director of the Pandemic Center at Brown
 University School of Public Health, said it would be reasonable to
 debate whether Covid vaccines should have been subject to additional
 study.  But she profoundly disagreed with Mr. Kennedy’s views, saying
 that “the idea that in early 2021 that you could be saying that people
 over the age of 65 don’t need Covid vaccines — that’s just nuts.”

 Vaccines have rare side effects, and there have been cases of injury
 from the Covid shots. Government officials weigh the harms against the
 potential to save lives. An estimate released in early 2024 found that
 the Covid VACCINES AND MITIGATION MEASURES SAVED ABOUT 800,000 LIVES
 IN THE UNITED STATES.

 Another study found that in late 2021 and 2022, Covid DEATH RATES
 AMONG UNVACCINATED PEOPLE WERE 14 TIMES THE RATES OF THOSE WHO HAD
 RECEIVED A COVID BOOSTER SHOT. Researchers also estimated that from
 May 2021 through September 2022, MORE THAN 230,000 DEATHS COULD HAVE
 BEEN PREVENTED among people who declined initial Covid inoculations.

 From the start of the Covid vaccine campaign, Mr. Kennedy’s view that
 the Covid vaccines were dangerous put him at odds with Mr. Trump, whose
 Operation Warp Speed to develop the vaccines was one of his policy
 triumphs. And Mr. Kennedy went on a concerted campaign against the vaccine.

 Mr. Kennedy told Louisiana lawmakers in late 2021 that the Covid
 vaccine was the “deadliest vaccine ever made.”

 Comments...

 I can't understand why the Congress can't listen to 75 Nobel Laureates
 who have written a letter saying that Kennedy shouldn't be the Health
 and Human Services Secretary?  Doesn't science mean anything anymore?
 Many of these people have devoted their entire adult lives to
 improving the plight of mankind.  Are we just going to disregard what
 they say like they don't know what they're talking about?  What's
 happening is absolutely crazy.

 Ask the parents of the unvaccinated Samoan children who died from
 measles due to RFK, Jr.'s anti vax campaign what they think of RFK,
 Jr. Over 80 Samoans died from measles, most of them children.  See the
 attached article from "The Lancet" for more information.  "The perils
 of RFK Junior's anti-vaccine leadership for public health"
 https://thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(24)02603-5/fulltext

 Republicans died during Covid at a 43% higher rate...They say 300,000
 people died needlessly because of Republican anti-public health
 attitudes. And Covid was only 2-3 times as deadly as the flu...If bird
 flu comes along with its higher death rate I honestly wouldn't care if
 they dropped like flies; if only they did not bring their children,
 their grandparents, and the rest of us down with them.

 How does Donald Trump identify the least qualified and most dangerous
 individual to fill every position? It’s uncanny.

 Raise your hand if you know anyone who has contracted polio in the
 U.S. in the last 50 years. No one? And why do you think that is?



1/20/2025:  Inauguration day


1/24/25:  Van Scoyoc Newsletter


		         Health

 Trump hits NIH with ‘devastating’ freezes on meetings, travel,
 communications, and hiring 

    President Donald Trump’s return to the White House is already
    having a big impact at the $47.4 billion U.S. National Institutes
    of Health (NIH), with the new administration imposing a wide range
    of restrictions, including the abrupt cancellation of meetings
    including grant review panels. Officials have also ordered a
    communications pause, a freeze on hiring, and an indefinite ban on
    travel. Officials halted midstream a training workshop for junior
    scientists, called off a workshop on adolescent learning minutes
    before it was to begin, and canceled meetings of two advisory
    councils. Panels that were scheduled to review grant proposals
    also received eleventh-hour word that they wouldn’t be meeting.
    Read more:  Science, STAT News

 Trump administration directs federal health agencies to pause
 communications 

    Amid a deluge of executive actions, the Trump administration has
    directed federal health agencies to pause external communications,
    such as regular scientific reports, updates to websites and health
    advisories, according to sources within the agencies. The initial
    orders were delivered Tuesday to staff at agencies inside the US
    Department of Health and Human Services, including to officials at
    the US Food and Drug Administration, the US Centers for Disease
    Control and Prevention and National Institutes of Health,
    according to the Washington Post, which first reported the
    story. Read more:  CNN
  
 Trump's gag order halts CDC publication

    For the first time in its more than 60-year history, the
    CDC's Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) did not go out
    as scheduled because of a communications pause at federal health
    agencies issued by the Trump administration. Past editors
    of MMWR and prior leaders of CDC lamented the lack of publication,
    and its potential impact on the distribution of vital public
    health information. Read more:  MedPage Today
  
 Senate sets date to vet RFK Jr.’s nomination to lead HHS 

    Prominent vaccine skeptic Robert F. Kennedy Jr. will
    testify before the Senate Finance Committee on Jan. 29 as he
    attempts to calm concerns from Democrats and Republicans about his
    nomination to be the nation’s top health official. Read more: 
    BioPharma Dive
  
 FDA approves Johnson & Johnson’s nasal spray for depression as
 stand-alone treatment 

    The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday approved Johnson &
    Johnson’s nasal spray to be used alone in adults with a major
    depressive disorder that is difficult to treat, as sales of the
    drug grow. The spray, called Spravato, is now the first-ever
    stand-alone therapy for treatment-resistant depression, which is
    when trying at least two standard treatments does little to
    nothing to improve depression symptoms in a patient. Read more: 
    CNBC
  
               		 Defense
  
 Pete Hegseth, Trump's Pentagon pick, clears Senate test vote Pete
 Hegseth, President Donald Trump's pick to lead the Pentagon, cleared
 a key procedural hurdle in the Senate on Thursday to advance his
 nomination. The vote on ending debate came down to the wire, though
 Hegseth ultimately secured 51 Republican votes to move forward. A
 final confirmation vote on Hegseth could now occur as soon as Friday
 or early Saturday. Two GOP senators voted against him: Sens. Lisa
 Murkowski (AK) and Susan Collins (ME). Read more:  ABC News
  
 DOD names officials temporarily helming key tech offices as the
 Pentagon awaits new leadership Several familiar faces who steered
 some of the Pentagon’s major technology and cybersecurity efforts
 over the last few years are operating in senior-level executive roles
 in acting capacities, as officials wait to see who the Trump
 administration will appoint to permanently lead key offices, multiple
 sources told DefenseScoop. Read more:  DefenseScoop
  
 Pentagon announces slate of new officials for second Trump term The
 Pentagon on Tuesday released a list of new officials sworn in this
 week to run the Defense Department — the most comprehensive look yet
 at its new team of leaders under the Trump administration. The 32
 positions include advisers and deputy assistant secretaries, none of
 which require Senate confirmation, meaning they can immediately take
 office. President Donald Trump’s top nominees to run the department
 are still awaiting approval from Capitol Hill, and these officials
 will help steer the department in the interim. Read more:  Military
 Times
  
 Trump’s Pentagon to begin task for crafting NORTHCOM plan to ‘seal’
 US borders Hours after being sworn in as the 47th president,
 President Trump began signing a flurry of executive orders and
 actions, including one presidential action declaring a national
 emergency on the Southern border and then an executive action calling
 on the Pentagon to clarify the military’s role “protecting the
 territorial integrity of the United States.” In that second one, he
 gives the Secretary of Defense 10 days to deliver a Unified Command
 Plan tasking US Northern Command (USNORTHCOM) with the border
 mission. Read more:  Breaking Defense
  
 Trump wants a faster security clearance process Often security
 clearances are considered an overhead function barely gaining the
 mention or attention of senior leaders. But the spotlight was back on
 the security clearance process Monday when President Donald Trump
 issued two executive orders addressing security clearances – one
 rescinding the security clearance eligibility of the 50 individuals
 who signed the Hunter Biden laptop memo, which described the
 controversy as a “Russian information operation,” and another
 offering immediate interim eligibility to presidential appointees
 whose background investigations have not yet been completed. Read
 more:  Defense One
  
			      Energy
  
 Trump signs executive order pausing wind turbine leases, could impact
 Midwest President Donald Trump on Monday made good his promise to
 create policy "where no windmills are being built." The executive
 order he signed Monday temporarily halts offshore wind energy lease
 sales in federal waters and pauses approvals, permits and loans for
 both offshore and onshore wind. During the pause, officials will
 review the environmental impact of both onshore and offshore wind
 projects on wildlife and consider the "economic costs associated with
 intermittent generation" and the effects of subsidies on the
 viability of the wind energy industry, according to the executive
 order. Read more: USA Today
  
 Trump signs order 'unleashing' Alaska's resources On his first day
 back in office, President Trump signed an executive order that aims
 to undo most of his predecessor’s work on Alaska energy and
 environmental issues. The order entitled “Unleashing Alaska’s
 Extraordinary Resource Potential” was among dozens Trump signed. “So,
 we’re opening up ANWR,” Trump said at the Resolute Desk in the Oval
 Office. The order calls for new leases in the Arctic National
 Wildlife Refuge and much more. Read more:  Alaska Public Media
 
 U.S. Department of Energy reverses Biden LNG pause The
 U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), effective Monday, ended the
 Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) pause and returning to regular order
 following direction given by President Donald J.  Trump to “unleash
 American Energy Dominance.” The Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon
 Management (FECM) is directed to resume consideration of pending
 applications to export American liquefied natural gas (LNG) to
 countries without a free trade agreement (FTA) with the United States
 in accordance with the Natural Gas Act. Read more:  DOE   DOE offers

 $30 million for superhot rock geothermal projects The Department of
 Energy last week launched a research and development program into the
 production of superhot rock geothermal energy, a resource that is
 unused but has major potential — 1% of its U.S. capacity could
 provide 4.3 TW of firm power, according to the Clean Air Task
 Force. DOE’s Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy is offering $30
 million in funding to begin its Stimulate Utilization of Plentiful
 Energy in Rocks through High-temperature Original Technologies, or
 SUPERHOT, program to provide access to reservoirs capable of
 producing 10 GW to 20 GW of baseload power at a competitive cost,
 ARPA-E said on Jan. 16. Read more:  Utility Drive
  
 Eergy committee sends Trump's Interior, Energy cabinet picks to full
 Senate The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee voted
 Thursday to advance President Donald Trump’s nominees to lead the
 Interior and Energy Departments — with both nominees receiving
 bipartisan support. The committee backed the nomination of former
 North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum to lead the Interior Department on an
 18-2 vote and advanced Chris Wright to lead the Energy Department on
 a 15-5 vote. Read more:  Politico

  
			      Space
  
 NASA awards Artemis logistics studies NASA issued study contracts to
 examine logistical issues for a long-term human presence on the moon
 despite uncertainty that the current administration will continue to
 pursue the Artemis lunar exploration campaign. NASA announced Jan. 23
 that it selected nine companies for contracts with a combined value
 of $24 million to study logistics needed for later human missions on
 the moon, when the agency anticipates larger crews spending more time
 on the lunar surface. Read more:  Space News
  
 Trump orders interim NASA chief to end DEI initiatives Following suit
 alongside other United States federal agencies, NASA has been
 instructed to close offices associated with diversity, equity,
 inclusion and accessibility (DEIA) initiatives, and end any related
 programs. Employees of the space agency received a memo from acting
 NASA administrator Janet Petro on Wednesday, issuing the directive in
 compliance with a pair of executive orders signed by President
 Trump during his first days in office. Read more:  Space.com

  
		      Science and Technology
  
 Trump ends Biden AI executive order The Trump administration has
 fulfilled its promise of revoking the Biden-era executive order on
 artificial intelligence which has served as a framework for Federal
 agencies approach to the emerging technology for over a year
 now. Signed in October 2023 by former president Joe Biden, the
 executive order on AI set standards for AI in eight categories
 including: safety and security; privacy; equity and civil rights;
 supporting consumers and workers; innovation and competition;
 American leadership; and government use of AI. The 2024 Republican
 Party platform vowed to repeal the order after saying that the order
 stifled AI innovation. Read more:  MeriTalk
  
 As Trump crows about billion-dollar A.I. deal, Musk undercuts
 announcement President Donald Trump hosted an event Tuesday with
 wealthy tech CEOs to tout what he portrayed as one of the biggest
 accomplishments of his presidency thus far: a $500 billion investment
 in artificial intelligence infrastructure. But it didn’t take long
 for his biggest benefactor, Elon Musk, to throw dirt all over
 it. Read more:  MSNBC

  
	       Fundamental Science and Engineering
  
 NSF invests $40M to strengthen STEM research capacity and workforce
 development across five EPSCoR jurisdictions The U.S. National
 Science Foundation is investing approximately $40 million to support
 research and STEM workforce development in Delaware, Guam, Kentucky,
 Louisiana and Vermont. These grants are part of the NSF Established
 Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (NSF EPSCoR), which aims to
 bolster research competitiveness among 28 targeted states and
 territories, referred to as jurisdictions. "EPSCoR is a driving force
 in enabling STEM research for everyone, everywhere, ensuring broad
 access to innovation and opportunity," said NSF Director Sethuraman
 Panchanathan. Read more:  NSF
  
 In Case You Missed It—Important Research News From NSF This Week
  
 Chasing sparks: Unraveling a 50-year-old X-ray mystery A Penn State
 University research team recently solved an enduring physics enigma,
 revealing new information about how X-rays form during
 thunderstorms. Learn more:  X-Ray Mystery
  
 A greener, cleaner way to extract critical metals from junk materials
 Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, along with
 collaborators at Northwestern University, have developed a safer and
 more sustainable method for extracting cobalt and nickel from junk
 materials. Both elements are critical components in the lithium-ion
 batteries that power many technologies central to modern life. Learn
 more:  Critical Metals
  
 Generate electricity by attaching device to your clothes A research
 team at the Seoul National University has developed a
 three-dimensional stretchable piezoelectric energy harvester that can
 harvest electrical energy using body movements. The device is to be
 used as a wearable energy harvester as it can be attached to the skin
 or clothes. Learn more:  Wearable Energy Harvester
  
 Superalloys resist wear at nearly forge-level heat using new process
 Finding lubricants that work at exceptionally high temperatures
 challenges researchers and industries alike. Recently, a Virginia
 Tech team may have uncovered a promising candidate by happenstance:
 transition metal spinel oxides formed on nickel-chromium-based
 superalloys. The researchers, funded by NSF, published their results
 in Nature Communications. Learn more:  Superalloys
  
 Brain-computer interface can enable people with paralysis to
 socialize with others, participate in remote work and enjoy
 recreational activities A research team from the University of
 Michigan, Stanford University, and Brown University have developed a
 brain-computer interface, which when  surgically placed in a research
 participant with tetraplegia, (paralysis in all four limbs), provides
 an unprecedented level of control over a virtual quadcopter -- just
 by thinking about moving his unresponsive fingers. Learn more: 
 Virtual Quadcopter
  

		      Oceans and Atmosphere

 US lawmakers move to block NOAA Fisheries from closing red snapper
 fishery Federal lawmakers from the U.S. state of Florida have
 introduced legislation to block NOAA Fisheries from closing the
 recreational South Atlantic red snapper fishery for three months of
 the year. “Florida’s fishing industry is a multi-billion-dollar
 economic driver in our state, supporting hundreds of thousands of
 jobs and attracting visitors to communities along our coast,” U.S.
 Senator Rick Scott (R-FL) said in a statement. “I’m proud to work
 with [U.S.  Representative John Rutherford (R-FL)] on the Red Snapper
 Act.” “We have ample data showing that red snapper seasons help
 support coastal economies and the national economy overall –
 especially in Florida,” U.S. Representative Darren Soto (D-FL), one
 of the cosponsors of the bill, said in a statement. Read more: 
 Seafood Source

  
		       Environment
  
 Senate committees advance Trump’s energy, environment nominees The
 Senate’s Environment and Public Works Committee advanced
 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) nominee Lee Zeldin in an 11-8
 vote, with Sen. Mark Kelly (D-AZ) as the only Democrat voting in
 favor. Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse (D-RI), top Democrat on Environment
 and Public Works, expressed opposition to Zeldin’s nomination, saying
 Zeldin did not condemn a reported effort to move the EPA headquarters
 out of Washington or fire agency employees and pointing to his
 “op-eds spouting Big Oil-approved talking points.” Republican Shelly
 Moore Capito (R-WV) supported Zeldin, saying, “I was very pleased
 during his testimony see how he intends to run the agency in line
 with the laws that Congress has passed with the goal of prioritizing
 EPA actions on the core responsibilities of the agency that are
 essential to protecting health and our land, air and water.” The Hill
  
 Trump scraps Clinton-era environmental justice order The Trump
 administration has erased a decades-old requirement for federal
 agencies to consider the environmental and public health consequences
 of their decisions on people of color and low-income communities. As
 part of a newly issued executive order, Trump revoked former
 President Bill Clinton's 1994 directive that's often seen as a
 milestone in federal efforts to overcome the effects of long-standing
 discrimination that has left disadvantaged populations
 disproportionately exposed to dangerous pollution. Read more:  E&E
 News
  
 Bloomberg to fund UN climate body after Donald Trump’s Paris exit The
 UN climate change body will receive funding from the foundation of
 billionaire Michael Bloomberg after President Donald Trump declared
 the United States would withdraw from the Paris Agreement for the
 second time. In an announcement on Thursday, Bloomberg said the
 intervention aims to ensure the United Nations Framework Convention
 on Climate Change (UNFCCC) remains fully funded despite the US
 halting its contributions. Read more:  Al Jazeera

  
			   Agriculture
  
 Trump pick to lead USDA eyes payments to farmers to cover trade
 losses from tariffs President Donald Trump's pick to lead the
 U.S. Department of Agriculture said on Thursday she would consider
 direct payments to farmers to offset losses from proposed tariffs,
 modeled after the approach taken in Trump's first term.  If
 confirmed, Brooke Rollins would lead the $200 billion agency and its
 nearly 100,000 employees whose broad remit includes nutrition and
 commodity programs, farm loans, forestry, and trade. Read more: 
 Reuters
  
 Feenstra expects changes as farm bill negotiations continue A member
 of the House Agriculture Committee expects changes to come from farm
 bill negotiations.  Iowa Republican Randy Feenstra says he was
 frustrated a new farm bill wasn’t finished last year. “Now we have
 majorities in the House and Senate, and we have the presidency. I do
 think there are going to be some things changing in the farm bill,
 probably some things around SNAP, work requirements, or fraud
 adjustments.” Read more:  Brownfield Ag News
  
 USDA announces presidential appointments to senior staff The
 U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) has announced several key
 presidential appointments who will hold senior staff positions at the
 agency. The appointments include Kailee Tkacz Buller, USDA Chief of
 Staff, Preston Parry, USDA Deputy Chief of Staff, Jennifer Tiller,
 M.B.A., M.P.A, Chief of Staff to the Deputy Secretary and Senior
 Advisor to the Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services,
 Ralph Linden, J.D., USDA Principal Deputy General Counsel, Audra
 Weeks, M.S., M.B.A., USDA Deputy Director of Communications, and
 Dominic Restuccia, USDA White House Liaison.  Read more: Food Safety
 Magazine
  
 Trump preparing 10% tariff on China in February Bloomberg’s Josh
 Wingrove and Hadriana Lowenkron reported Tuesday that President
 Donald Trump widened his tariff threats to include China and the
 European Union on his second day back in office after day one saw
 Canada and Mexico in his sights. “‘We’re talking about a tariff of
 10% on China, based on the fact that they’re sending fentanyl to
 Mexico and Canada,’ Trump said during an event at the White House on
 Tuesday, specifying Feb. 1 as a possible date,” Wingrove and
 Lowenkron reported. Read more: Successful Farming
  


1/31/25: 

 xFrom rwo@virginia.edu Fri Jan 31 02:04:17 2025
 Date: Fri, 31 Jan 2025 02:04:15
 From: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
 To: "astro-faculty@virginia.edu" <astro-faculty@virginia.edu>, "astro-postdocs@virginia.edu" <astro-postdocs@virginia.edu>, "astro-staff@virginia.edu" <astro-staff@virginia.edu>

 Subject: Impoundment of grant funds

 I've attached below the best available information on the Trump
 administration's attempt to impound scientific grants and contracts.
 This is from the American Institute of Physics' "FYI" newsletter.
 Dara Norman, the president of the American Astronomical Society, has
 also issued some comments on the situation, but those were less
 specific.

       By the way, I think Norman's letter only went out to AAS
       members, and I discovered last year (to my surprise) that most
       Astronomy Dept faculty are _not_ AAS members.  This would be a
       good time to sign up, my friends.

 Even with the initial policy rescinded (and probably thoroughly
 illegal in the first place), the confusion continues, and some
 agencies may adopt a defensive posture in which they implement
 part of the policy as a precaution.

 In particular, NSF had threatened to pause "all payments of funds under
 open awards."  This would be serious if it continues.  Most agencies
 do not award full funding to new university grants when they begin.
 Rather, they transfer funds to hosting institutions on an incremental
 basis, and this affects approved individual grants in different ways.
 You would have to determine the actual cash balance in UVa coffers for
 each of your grants before you continue spending.  The impacts may
 differ between grants made directly from the agencies and those which
 are awarded through contractors, such as NRAO, STScI, IPAC, and
 Chandra. UVa had better issue clarifications about this soon.

 The administration is also evidently determined to quench spending on
 DEI and related initiatives.  I believe both NSF and NASA have
 required PIs to include DEI provisions in all approved grants for several
 years.  Any spending in those categories is definitely vulnerable.
 It's especially dangerous for any project in which DEI is mentioned in
 the official abstract, since the agencies are going to be required to
 send that for review by adversarial parties.  I doubt this is going to
 be resolved for some months, but you should be pressuring the UVa
 administration and the major institutions that represent US science
 for clarifications ASAP.

 With due respect for the estimable attributes of Man's Best Friend,
 this is a supreme example of a "dog's breakfast."

	 Best,

	   Bob

 -----------------------------------------------------------------


 1/30/25: FYI.  TRUMP SPENDING FREEZES SOW CONFUSION AMONG RESEARCHERS

 A White House memo directing federal agencies to pause grant payments
 caused widespread confusion and concern among scientists and research
 institutions this week. The Office of Management and Budget abruptly
 rescinded that memo on Wednesday, less than two days after issuing it,
 but the White House press secretary later insisted that other freezes
 tied to executive orders issued by Trump remain in effect.

 On his first day in office, Trump ordered agencies to terminate all
 grants related to diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives “to the
 maximum extent allowed by law” and to pause spending on energy and
 climate initiatives related to the “Green New Deal,” without defining
 the term. The subsequent OMB memo issued on Monday was widely
 interpreted to apply to most federal grant programs, regardless of
 whether they were singled out by earlier executive orders. OMB said
 the pause would begin at 5 pm Tuesday, with no end date specified.
 OMB quickly faced legal challenges from states and non-profit
 organizations, and a federal judge temporarily halted the grants
 freeze until Feb. 3, when a court hearing is scheduled to take
 place. Congressional Democrats also decried Trump’s actions as
 illegal.

 IMPACT ON FEDERAL RESEARCH STILL UNCLEAR

 OMB appeared to walk back the scope of the funding freeze on Tuesday,
 stating in a follow-up memo that the pause is “expressly limited to
 programs, projects, and activities implicated by the President’s
 Executive Orders, such as ending diversity, equity and inclusion
 (DEI), the green new deal, and funding nongovernmental organizations
 that undermine the national interest.”

 OMB also issued a 52-page spreadsheet that asked federal agencies to
 review thousands of grant programs to evaluate whether they are
 subject to Trump’s executive orders, including many scientific
 research programs. It is unclear whether federal agencies will be
 expected to comply with this request in light of OMB rescinding the
 first memo.  The spreadsheet came with instructions for federal
 agencies to answer 14 questions about each program by Feb. 7,
 including details such as whether the program is expected to disburse
 any funds between now and March 15 — the day after the current
 deadline for Congress to reach a deal on funding the federal
 government.

 On Tuesday, the National Science Foundation announced it would be
 pausing “all review panels, new awards, and all payments of funds
 under open awards” as it works to provide the program review and
 analysis requested by OMB. NSF updated that message after the OMB memo
 was rescinded, removing the previous language and stating, “Our top
 priority is resuming our funding actions and services to the research
 community and our stakeholders.”  NSF also advised, however, that its
 grantees must comply with the Trump administration’s executive orders
 and cease prohibited activities. “In particular, this may include, but
 is not limited to conferences, trainings, workshops, considerations
 for staffing and participant selection, and any other grant activity
 that uses or promotes the use of DEIA principles and frameworks or
 violates federal anti-discrimination laws.”

 WIDESPREAD CONFUSION AND CRITICISM

 Prior to the announcement of the memo’s rescission, House Science
 Committee Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren (D-CA) described
 [aip.us17.list-manage.com] the Trump administration’s attempt to
 freeze federal funding as an “unlawful impoundment” and an “attack on
 the American taxpayer.”  “Scientists researching everything from cures
 to childhood cancer to severe weather prediction are wondering if
 their research will remain funded,” said Lofgren, adding “This is a
 mess.”

 Jennifer Jones, director of the Center for Science and Democracy at
 the Union of Concerned Scientists, said in an interview on Tuesday
 that OMB’s plans to pause the disbursement of funds for federal
 research had prompted a “whole new level of anxiety” among scientists,
 with some questioning whether their jobs and the future of their field
 of research are on the line. The Trump administration’s actions are
 “meant to really just intimidate everybody doing science and
 research,” Jones said.

 University research management offices responded in varying ways to
 the OMB memos, with some initially advising academics to pause
 spending federal grant money, and others assuring them that the memos
 would not impact them. Much of that guidance has now been updated, but
 inconsistencies remain.  The Association of Public and Land-grant
 Universities and the Association of American Universities sharply
 criticized the OMB memo. “We are extremely concerned about the impact
 of this action on our country’s ability to maintain its scientific and
 technological lead against competitors and potential adversaries,”
 wrote AAU President Barbara Snyder in a statement on Tuesday. APLU
 President Mark Becker described OMB’s memo as an “overly broad mandate
 that is unnecessary and damaging.”

 “OMB’s action has unnecessarily injected an enormous amount of
 confusion and uncertainty across the nation,” Becker said.

                     ENDD 1/31/25 MSSG
 ---------------------------------------------------------------


FEBRUARY 


 2/1/25: Andrew Weissman (substack).  FBI firings / My take on the
         remarkable events today at DOJ-FBI

 Here is my take on the above developments as recounted by the acting 
 Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (where I served as the 
 General Counsel under Director Mueller). The head of the FBI recounts 
 receiving a memo from the acting Deputy Attorney General to fire 8 
 senior career FBI personnel (unless they resign) and the compilation of 
 a list of thousands of FBI personnel who worked on the J6 cases.

  1. Firing career FBI agents without cause would violate civil service
     protections. If the firing is based on their oversight of J6 or
     Trump criminal investigations that would not constitute good cause.
     So, if the above is accurate (and I have no reason to think it is
     not) then Emil Bove (the Acting Deputy Attorney General and util
     recently one of Trump’s criminal defense counsel) is taking action
     that violates their rights.

  2. The wording of the above is interesting— it does not say whether
     Bove was saying in the memo that Bove himself was firing these FBI
     personnel or whether Bove was directing the acting FBI Director to
     do so (the acting FBI Director reports to Bove). But it sounds to me
     like Bove sent a memo that directed the acting FBI Director to fire
     these 8 senior FBI personnel (“are to be terminated”), and he
     refused. The memo is worded in an odd passive voice, suggesting the
     FBI Director did NOT go along with the Bove “resign or be fired”
     scheme, but did pass along on what his boss, Bove, said he wanted to
     do to them.

  3. The Bove memo’s direction to compile a list of over a thousand
     people seven to create a targeted enemies list — what possible
     legitimate reason is there to hold these people to heightened
     scrutiny? Absolutely none that I can think of, whereas it is
     entirely consistent with a retribution effort.

  4. All of this is not just highly unusual — ie it had NEVER happened
     before — but it may well be completely illegal, and certainly
     appears on its face to be. And this is happening at the top of what
     is supposed to be a Justice Department.

  5. If there is a lawsuit by the affected FBI personnel, it may
     ironically result in a trial where the facts about the righteousness
     of the J6 cases and the Trump criminal prosecutions is laid out for
     all to see - ironically, exactly what Trump has sought to keep under
     wraps and whitewash. Wouldn’t that be a case of just deserts!



2/6/25: WP.  Trump policies sow chaos, confusion across scientific
   community / U.S. scientists, unaccustomed to shock-and-awe
   political assaults, are reeling from President Donald Trump’s
   executive orders on DEI, gender and other subjects.

 February 6, 2025 at 6:00 a.m. 

 By Joel Achenbach and Carolyn Y. Johnson

 Scientists knew change was coming under President Donald Trump, but
 they were not remotely prepared for the chaos, confusion and fear
 incited by executive orders that have destabilized the world’s
 largest engine for innovation and discovery.

 Small-scale turbulence is manageable in the nation’s laboratories and
 academic institutions, but researchers trying to navigate unprecedented
 policy changes are whispering existential doubts.

 “It’s feeling like this could be the beginning of the end of my career,”
 said Benjamin Karin, a National Science Foundation postdoctoral fellow
 and evolutionary biologist at the University of California at Berkeley.
 “It’s hard to know if that really is true, but I’m starting to have
 those doubts. It’s a pretty awful feeling.”

 The first weeks of the Trump administration have been dizzying for
 scientists in government agencies and laboratories across the country
 where federal dollars keep experiments running. One of Trump’s first
 orders demanded an end to all government spending on diversity, equity
 and inclusion (DEI). Another said federal employees must use the word
 “sex” rather than “gender” and forbade federal spending on “gender
 ideology.”

 The orders and other administration memos were stunning and bewildering
 to many researchers because the language — such as an order to stop
 “Marxist equity” efforts — was ambiguous.

 “Marxist equity? What is that? I don’t even know what that is,” said
 Darby Saxbe, a University of Southern California clinical psychologist
 who has a five-year National Institutes of Health grant to study the
 neurological changes in the brains of new parents.

 As they await more clarity, many scientists are being told to move
 forward with existing projects. But the uncertainty in the nation’s
 laboratories is pervasive, with scientists unsure whether the work they
 do will remain funded, free of political interference and published
 without censorship.

 “You’ve got scientists who should be thinking creatively about their
 next experiment and the next discovery that we hope they make and
 instead are thinking about their car payment or their house payment
 because a lot of early-career scientists live paycheck to paycheck — and
 that is incredibly concerning to me,” said Sudip Parikh, chief executive
 of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), the
 nation’s leading advocacy organization for science education and research.

 The state of play has changed not daily but hourly, as administration
 edicts have been rescinded or halted by judicial orders. At one point,
 scientists at the National Institutes of Health campus in Bethesda,
 Maryland, were told they couldn’t purchase critical lab supplies to keep
 their experiments running. A few days later, they could**— though
 scientists report it’s an onerous, clunky process.

 Meanwhile, postdoctoral fellows funded by the National Science
 Foundation scrambled to pay their bills after the funding portal that
 provides their stipends was ordered frozen. Then the portal reopened
 <https://new.nsf.gov/executive-orders> Sunday in response to a court order.

 But for how long? At the NSF, a $9 billion agency that funds basic
 research across the nation, staffers were informed Tuesday that
 significant layoffs would soon hit the agency. Four employees who
 attended those meetings shared information on the condition of anonymity
 for fear of retaliation. They described an agency beset by fear and shock.

 Parikh was among four witnesses who testified Wednesday before the House
 Science, Space and Technology Committee, which held its first hearing of
 this congressional session, focusing broadly on the state of American
 science and technology. Much of the hearing was devoted to fears that
 the United States is falling behind China in the global competition for
 supremacy in science and technology.

 Several Democrats sharply criticized Trump’s executive orders. “My fear
 is that the chaos the new administration is sowing will be enough to
 leave our science and technology enterprise in ruins, with Chinese
 Communist leaders in Beijing popping champagne corks,”**said Rep. Zoe
 Lofgren (D-California).

 But witness Samuel Hammond, chief economist of the Foundation for
 American Innovation, derided DEI efforts at science agencies, saying
 they have “politicized research, demoralized faculty and wasted billions
 of taxpayer dollars.”

 A report released last year by Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) claimed NSF had
 directed $2 billion to “thousands of research projects that promoted
 neo-Marxist perspectives or DEI tenets.” But Rep. Valerie Foushee
 (D-North Carolina) disputed that, saying the Cruz report was based on a
 search of language in NSF grants that flagged anything with words such
 as “disability, women, underrepresented, diversity, bias, minority,
 barrier, systemic, Hispanic.”

 Foushee said there is an effort to demonize research “that has anything
 to do with people who aren’t White, able-bodied men.”

 Science is, by its nature, unpredictable. The next big step in
 artificial intelligence, cancer biology or geoscience may turn up
 somewhere entirely unexpected.

 That’s why science agencies sprinkle funding widely to laboratories
 across the United States, enterprises that are ideally run by a diverse
 workforce. No one can be certain who will generate the next great idea.

 The government spends about $200 billion a year on all forms of research
 and development. The private sector spends more. But the government is
 still the biggest funder of “basic” research, in which results may have
 no application or may wind up creating something as revolutionary as
 GPS, smartphones or the internet.

 Researchers who depend on federal dollars are in the same position as
 other federal workers rattled by Trump’s policy changes. But science
 agencies and university-based**researchers have generally enjoyed
 bipartisan support and have little experience with shock-and-awe
 political assaults.

 Moreover, the scientific community, historically lacking in diversity,
 has embraced DEI initiatives. And diversity is the law: The 2022 Chips
 and Science Act passed by Congress requires the NSF to broaden the
 demographics of science research. The act “bolsters opportunities for
 minority-serving institutions, emerging research institutions and
 rural communities” and “establishes a chief diversity officer at NSF
 to advance diversity, equity and inclusion,” according to the NSF’s
 website.

 Dannagal Young, a professor of communication, political science and
 international relations at the University of Delaware, expressed
 consternation that NSF-funded researchers looking into racial, gender
 and ethnic differences in political and health outcomes feel constrained
 in how they perform their work.

 “That’s like if you went to a climate scientist and said, you can still
 apply for funds, but you are prohibited from making any reference to
 warming ocean temperatures,” Young said in an email. “Or if you said to
 a neuroscientist, make sure your grant proposal doesn’t make any
 reference to the human brain.”

 But trust in science edged downward during the pandemic. Leaders in
 public health fields were demonized for pandemic-era
 restrictions. Conspiracy theories have flourished as the information
 ecosystem has fragmented, and doubts about the credibility of
 government experts have increased.

 And then Trump returned to power, issuing a blizzard of orders and memos
 that confounded scientific and medical researchers and their institutions.

 The usual process for reviewing grant proposals was paused. The NSF has
 scrambled to identify projects with language that would violate the
 Trump administration’s orders to halt efforts related to DEI or “gender
 ideology.”

 Diana Macias, an NSF postdoctoral fellow and forest ecologist at the
 University of California at Berkeley who is Latina, described the shock
 of learning that at the National Science Foundation, certain keywords —
 including “women” and “Hispanic minority” — were being used to flag
 scientific grants for review.

 “My identity is being targeted in so many different ways,” Macias said.
 “It is very terrifying.”

 After an initially slow response, some professional associations
 representing researchers have become more vocal in recent days.

 Janice R. Lachance, interim executive director of the American
 Geophysical Union posted a statement Monday night on the
 organization’s website saying “much of what is coming from the
 Executive branch of the U.S. government runs counter to AGU’s mission
 and values and harms our members.” She specified the administration’s
 actions concerning diversity and inclusion efforts and research on
 climate change.

 The Infectious Diseases Society of America and the Association of
 Schools and Programs of Public Health also have expressed alarm at the
 removal of information from websites,**including those of the Centers
 for Disease Control and Prevention, and withdrawal of research
 manuscripts under consideration by scientific journals.

 Some of the nation’s largest professional scientific and medical
 associations are still trying to decide how best to respond to the Trump
 administration’s aggressive intervention. Major research universities
 have been similarly cautious in their responses. The generally muted
 reaction, according to leaders in the research community, is partly due
 to the rapid pace of the executive orders, the vague nature of their
 wording and the judicial interventions.

 “The hardest thing is just trying to keep up with what each thing
 means,” said Parikh, the AAAS chief executive. “We have a set of
 principles about what we think is important, and we’re sticking with
 those as opposed to trying to respond to everything that comes out —
 it’s too hard and too fast to do that.”

 Marcia McNutt, president of the National Academy of Sciences, said the
 organization’s board of directors will meet next week to decide how to
 proceed.

 “We’re concerned about saying anything that would be instantly out of
 date,” McNutt said.

 Within science agencies, career employees described an atmosphere of
 fear and anxiety.

 “People are scared. They don’t know what’s coming,” said physicist
 Michael Lubell, a professor at the City College of the City University
 of New York and former longtime chief lobbyist for the American Physical
 Society. “Could there by retribution if they speak out?”

 /Lena H. Sun contributed to this report./

 349 Comments...

 I have two daughters that are scientists and they and so many other
 scientists and researchers are scared and heartbroken. It takes years
 of hard work to get where they have gotten and they do their work for
 humanity. I truly believe that this mayhem is going to hurt us and we
 as a country won’t have any friends to help bail us out. We’ve pissed
 them off.

 Forbidden words? FORBIDDEN WORDS???
 Orwell is doing 2500 rpms.

 Well, I am a member of the scientific community with a long history of
 service in public natural resource agencies. I am not overcome by
 chaos or confusion. What I am feeling comes a lot closer to anger and
 a sense of betrayal.

 Trump likes to think of himself as smart, in spite of all evidence to
 the contrary. So he really hates people who actually are smart,
 because they show how stupid Trump really is

 I'm a scientist and I know what it is like to live pay check to pay
 check as a post-doc and to also know that in another year or so I'll
 have to find another job. But having survived those years and having
 had a long, wonderful productive career in science, I'm glad I'm now
 retired and don't have to put up with Trump's idiocy.

 The GOP is a death cult, with evangelicals salivating for the Second
 Coming in the Middle East, so pouring fuel on that fire is fine with
 them. Plagues, famine, wars - they welcome them because they believe
 in fairy tales, and Trump & Musk are using that ignorance to further
 their greed for power.

 Texans should be deeply ashamed of their state for the representation
 by a person like Sen. Ted Cruz. Ted is nothing but a butt-smooching
 sycophant who has moved Texas to a level below Alabama, Mississippi,
 Louisiana, Florida, and Georgia. Texas is now officially the epicenter
 of stupidity and bigotry in America! Thanks Ted! We're Number 1!

 Even a court order doesn't restore NSF funding that ends with no
 notice. Payroll ending NOW. Please check and see how many NSF labs who
 supposedly have funds restored by court order are actually receiving
 money. Impounding of funds is happening right now.

 The Trump Regime is about showmanship, drama, faux outrage, conspiracy
 theories and self righteous indignation.

 They cancelled grants into biodiversity. They are insane.

 Don't be cowed by all the anti-DEI howling from Trump and his
 ilk. They clearly have their own DEI as they search for people who are
 Delusional, Egomaniacal, and Ignorant (hence anti-scientific, allergic
 to facts)


2/7/25: NYT.  Trump Administration Cuts Put Medical Progress at Risk,
   Researchers Say / Grants from the National Institutes of Health
   come with additional money for overhead. A planned $4 billion cut
   would leave colleges with large budget gaps.

     Published Feb. 7, 2025Updated Feb. 8, 2025, 4:34 p.m. ET

     [The proposed policy appears to be based on a deliberate
     misunderstanding of indirect cost charges, and it fails to
     acknowledge that the charges are based on legally binding
     agreements negotiated with the universities by the federal
     government.]

 The nation’s universities and academic medical centers were reeling on
 Saturday from a directive by the Trump administration to slash funding
 for medical research, a decision that doctors and scientists said would
 have a devastating effect on studies aimed at finding treatments for
 diseases such as cancer, diabetes and heart disease.

 The change is aimed at reducing the amount of tax dollars that
 universities spend on overhead costs. The National Institutes of Health,
 which announced the move Friday evening, said $9 billion of $35 billion
 <https://x.com/NIH/status/1888004759396958263> — or about 26 percent —
 of grant dollars distributed last year had gone to overhead.

 The new policy, which takes effect on Monday, will cap “indirect funds”
 for costs like buildings, utilities and support staff at 15 percent and
 is aimed at saving $4 billion.

 Dr. David J. Skorton, president of the Association of American Medical
 Colleges, said the policy would sharply cut funds to universities and
 medical centers that do N.I.H.-funded research, likely limiting the
 number of studies that could go forward.

 “These are real consequences, longer waits for cures and for diagnosis,
 slower scientific progress, losing out to competitors around the world,
 and fewer jobs,” he said, adding: “Those who are facing any health
 challenges will suffer from less biomedical research.”

 Dr. Robert Lefkowitz, a Duke University professor of medicine who won
 the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2012, said that indirect funds pay for
 the purchase and maintenance of highly sophisticated microscopes that
 enable him to examine the structure of molecules.

 That fundamental research, he said, has made it possible to develop
 lifesaving medicines for cancer and other diseases. No single
 researcher, or even a group of researchers, could afford the upkeep on
 the equipment without the federal dollars tacked onto their grants to
 support it, he said.

 “I think the American people need to understand how devastating it would
 be if this goes through,” Dr. Lefkowitz said. “A lot of research would
 just have to stop; I can’t imagine that the shortfall could be met from
 other sources.”

 The N.I.H. funding also supports
 <https://www.unitedformedicalresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/UMR-NIHs-Role-in-Sustaining-the-US-Economy-2024-Update.pdf>
 about 412,000 jobs, from research assistants to grant managers to
 people who dispose of toxic chemicals, according to United for
 Medical Research, an organization of universities and health
 advocates.

 The leading category of study at the National Institutes of Health is
 cancer research, an area that has produced breakthrough drugs that have
 significantly extended survival for people with certain blood cancers
 and skin cancers. Close behind is infectious disease research, an area
 that produced the mRNA technology that rapidly produced vaccines against
 Covid in 2020.

 Advances in sequencing the human genome supported in part by the
 institutes also led to therapies for people with cystic fibrosis who
 expected to die in their 30s, but are now living into their 60s.

 Still, the Trump administration has been sharply critical of what it
 derides as “woke” policies and cultures at universities, which have been
 bracing for a hit to their budgets. Project 2025, the Heritage
 Foundation’s policy blueprint for a Republican presidency, called for
 capping research funds, saying they were sometimes used to fund
 diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives. Cutting such costs would
 “reduce federal taxpayer subsidization of leftist agendas,” Project
 2025’s authors said.

 Elon Musk, who is running President Trump’s government efficiency
 program, hailed the announcement of the cuts on social media. He
 suggested that some elite universities devote much more than 30 percent
 of their grant dollars to administrative costs.

 “Can you believe that universities with tens of billions in endowments
 were siphoning off 60% of research award money for ‘overhead’?” Mr. Musk
 wrote on X, his social media platform. “What a ripoff!”

 While some elite universities do have large endowments, Lawrence O.
 Gostin, an expert in public health law at Georgetown University, said
 indirect costs are a lifeline for smaller academic institutions,
 including historically Black colleges, that depend on federal dollars
 and conduct medical research on tight margins, often losing money.

 “This would be catastrophic,” Professor Gostin said. “It would mean
 that, at the most extreme, universities wouldn’t be able to even take
 N.I.H. money, and would have to stop doing essential research, including
 research on pediatric cancer and heart disease and dementia and a whole
 range of other things. At the very best, they would be hemorrhaging money.”

 He called the policy “literally the opposite of the mission of the
 N.I.H., which is to advance research, not to make it difficult or even
 unaffordable.”

 The administration has said the changes taking effect Monday will apply
 to existing grants. That will be jarring, said David A. Baltrus, a
 University of Arizona associate professor whose lab is developing
 antibiotics for crops.

 “I think it’s going to destroy research universities in the short term,
 and I don’t know after that,” he said. “They rely on the money. They
 budget for the money. The universities were making decisions expecting
 the money to be there.”

 Dr. Baltrus said that his research is focused on efforts such as keeping
 E. coli bacteria out of crops like sprouts and lettuce. He said the
 policy change would force his university to make cuts to support staff
 and other overhead costs.

 An N.I.H. social media post said the change could save the federal
 government as much as $4 billion and sharply cut payments to Harvard,
 Yale and Johns Hopkins, which have overhead rates above 60 percent of
 their grant sums.

 The institutes are currently supporting about 11,000 research projects
 in cancer research. Infectious disease research is a close second, with
 nearly 9,000 projects underway. Much of the research the institutes fund
 is meant to discover how diseases work — in the interest of finding cures.

 Dr. Skorton, a cardiologist and the president of the medical school
 association, said the N.I.H. has helped drastically change the fate of
 people with congenital heart disease, the most common birth defect. He
 said when he was born in 1949, 80 percent of people with the condition
 died before adulthood. Now, 90 percent of them survive.

 The N.I.H. funds also support medical equipment suppliers and janitorial
 services nationwide, with $6.8 billion going to California, $5 billion
 to New York, $4.5 billion to Massachusetts and $3.8 billion to North
 Carolina.

 The proposal may tee up a potent test for Republican lawmakers who have
 largely avoided direct challenges to the Trump administration.

 Republican-leaning states reap millions from the institutes, including
 about $1 billion each to Florida, Missouri and Tennessee, according to
 N.I.H. data <https://reporter.nih.gov/>. North Carolina researchers were
 awarded $3.7 billion in grants last year.

 Senator Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, said in a statement late
 Friday that the move could “dismantle the biomedical research system,
 stifle the development of new cures for disease and rip treatments away
 from patients in need.”

 “Just because Elon Musk doesn’t understand indirect costs doesn’t mean
 Americans should have to pay the price with their lives,” Ms. Murray
 said in a statement. Her state gets about $1.5 billion in N.I.H. funds.

 The institutes spent about $35 billion in 2023 on about 50,000
 competitive grants to about 300,000 researchers at 2,500 universities,
 medical schools and other research institutions nationwide, according to
 the Trump administration. Of that, about $26 billion directly funded
 research and $9 billion covered indirect costs.

 The indirect costs pay for buildings, utilities, lab equipment, cleaning
 costs and “research administration,” which includes the work of safety
 and regulatory committees that are mandated by the federal government,
 as well as animal caretakers and other support staff.

 One study found
 <https://www.unitedformedicalresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/UMR-NIHs-Role-in-Sustaining-the-US-Economy-2024-Update.pdf>
 that every dollar the institutes spend generates $2.50 in additional
 spending economic activity.

 Dr. Norman Sharpless, a former director of the N.I.H.’s National Cancer
 Institute, said he expected a forceful response from universities.

 “I think it’ll be a very swift legal response from the university
 counsels across the country,” Dr. Sharpless said. “I do think it will
 get enjoined, but hopefully it will lead to a discussion of what
 indirect costs ought to be. And that’s a healthy discussion to be having.”

 He said 15 percent in indirect costs would be too low in high-cost
 cities with key research centers such as New York City, San Diego and
 Boston. “Because you’re effectively saying you can’t do science in
 Manhattan,” he said.



2/7/25: FYI: Science Policy News.  SCIENCE AGENCIES BRACE FOR MASS
     LAYOFFS / Reports suggest NSF, NOAA, and NIH are among the
     agencies in line for major cuts.

     [My 0102.bushie-add file contains a more compact version of
     this article for 2/7/25.]     

 A flurry of news reports this week suggests that the Trump
 administration’s plans to aggressively downsize the federal workforce
 will extend to science agencies.

 The National Science Foundation has been asked to prepare to lay off
 between a quarter and half of its staff in the next two months,
 according to reporting by Politico on remarks made by a senior NSF
 employee at an internal meeting. The administration may also propose
 cutting NSF’s $9 billion budget to as low as $3 billion, an anonymous
 source told Ars Technica.
 (FYI has not been able to independently corroborate these accounts.)

   [A comment on a different ArsTechnica article repeats the amount of
   the dollar cut but also says the intention is to move research
   dollars to the private sector from the university sector.]  

 Cuts of that magnitude have been proposed in the past by Russell
 Vought, whom the Senate confirmed yesterday as director of the White
 House Office of Management and Budget on a party-line vote. In 2022,
 Vought’s Center for Renewing America proposed cutting NSF’s annual
 budget to just under $4 billion to “force a reprioritization of the
 core mission of NSF and eliminate the leftward march of the agency
 and its funding choices.”

 Congressional Democrats expressed alarm about the Politico report at
 a Wednesday hearing on the state of the U.S. research enterprise held
 by the House Science Committee. Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren (D-CA)
 said she has heard corroborating reports from individual agency
 employees but is unsure if they are accurate.

 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration may also be in
 line for major cuts. Former NOAA officials told CBS News that current
 employees “have been told to expect a 50% reduction in staff and
 budget cuts of 30%.” Vought’s 2022 budget blueprint proposed a 20%
 cut to NOAA, citing a desire to eliminate its focus on “climate
 extremism.”

 Although Congress uniformly rejected the steep budget cuts that
 President Donald Trump proposedfor science agencies in his first term
 in office, Trump is now aggressively challenging congressional
 spending prerogatives. Trump’s rapid dismantling of the U.S. Agency
 for International Development has raised fears that other agencies
 could be next. (Unions representing USAID workers have filed lawsuits
 attempting to reverse the dismantling.)

 The National Institutes of Health is also bracing for upheaval along
 with the rest of the Department of Health and Human Services. Trump
 is considering an order that would direct HHS to fire thousands of
 employees, according to the Wall Street Journal.

 Trump’s nominee to lead HHS, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., said last year he
 wants to immediately fire around 600 employees at NIH.Sen. Angela
 Alsobrooks (D-MD) raised the subject in his Senate confirmation
 hearing, expressing concern that Kennedy indicated to her in a
 private meeting that he intends to “clean house” at NIH. Kennedy
 responded in the hearing by saying he wants to remove “corrupt”
 scientists, citing recent reporting about how a NIH researcher
 manipulated images used in research papers.

 The administration is exploring a variety of mechanisms to downsize
 the federal workforce. The Office of Personnel Management has asked
 agencies to produce lists of employees who joined recently and are
 still on their probationary periods, which makes them easier to
 remove. OPM has also made offers of deferred resignations to hundreds
 of thousands of federal employees. (The initial deadline to respond
 was yesterday but a judge extended it to permit further court
 proceedings on whether the offers are legal.)

 In addition, Trump is in the process of reclassifying swaths of
 federal workers into roles that have fewer civil service protections,
 arguing that policymaking positions should be subject to greater
 political control. An executive order issued his first day in office
 creates a new “Policy/Career” category in the schedule of civil
 service positions, a renaming of the “Schedule F” order he issued
 toward the end of his first term.

 Agencies could also undergo a reduction in force (RIF), a legal
 mechanism to lay off federal workers. Federal regulations permit RIFs
 due to reasons such as agency reorganizations, lack of work, and
 shortage of funds.

 The administration is already attempting to merge USAID into the State
 Department, and it is rumored to be considering moving at least part
 of NOAA into the Interior Department.  There will likely be lawsuits
 challenging the authority of the president to take such moves absent
 congressional authorization.

 Another action that could lead to major staffing changes is Trump’s
 pledgeto move up to 100,000 federal employees out of the DC area. For
 instance, policymakers have begun to talk about the prospect of moving
 NASA’s headquarters out of DC to states such as Florida or Texas.

 -----------

 Related:

 [2/4/25]: Politico.  Science funding agency threatened with mass layoffs
   / National Science Foundation staff heard the plans at a meeting
   Tuesday.

 One of the United States’ leading funders of science and engineering
 research is planning to lay off between a quarter and a half of its
 staff in the next two months, a top National Science Foundation
 official said Tuesday.

 The comments by Assistant Director Susan Margulies came at an
 all-hands meeting of the NSF’s Engineering Directorate, according to
 two program managers who attended.

 Marguiles, NSF and the White House didn’t respond to detailed
 questions about the layoffs and their potential implications.

 “A large-scale reduction, in response to the President’s workforce
 executive orders, is already happening,” a spokesperson for the Office
 of Personnel Management said in an email. “The government is
 restructuring, and unfortunately, many employees will later realize
 they missed a valuable, once-in-a-lifetime opportunity in the deferred
 resignation offer.”

 The NSF announcement comes amid reports of planned layoffs at the
 General Services Administration and with a Thursday deadline looming
 for federal workers to accept buyouts from the Trump administration
 that some former government officials have warned are legally dubious.

 The Trump administration is trying to “scare the shit out of people so
 they take advantage of the resignation offers out of fear,” said one
 NSF program manager who asked not to be identified to avoid
 retribution.

 But if the White House and its so-called Department of Government
 Efficiency are serious about slashing NSF, the result would be
 catastrophic, the same program manager warned. Cutting the $10 billion
 grantmaking agency in half would “gut the intellectual center of
 U.S. leadership in science and technology,” the official said.

 It’s unclear how the threatened reduction in force at NSF would comply
 with union agreements the agency has with the American Federation of
 Government Employees. AFGE didn’t respond to requests for comment.

 -----------

 Related:

 [2/6/25]: ArsTechnica.  White House budget proposal could shatter the
   National Science Foundation / "This kind of cut would kill American
   science and boost China."

 Sometime during the next several weeks, the directors of federal
 agencies will receive a draft version of President Trump's budget
 request for the coming fiscal year, which begins on October 1. This
 "passback review" is a standard part of the federal budgeting process
 which ends in Congress writing a budget and the president signing it
 into law.

 The budget request will be the first of President Trump's second term,
 and it will offer a clear window into the priorities of his new
 administration. Although widespread cuts are expected for much of the
 government's discretionary spending, the outlook for the National
 Science Foundation appears to be especially grim.

 During an emotional all-hands meeting on Tuesday, the agency's
 assistant director for engineering, Susan Margulies, told agency
 employees to EXPECT BETWEEN A QUARTER AND A HALF OF ITS STAFF TO BE
 LAID OFF within the coming months, E&E News reported.

 On Thursday, two sources told Ars that the science agency should
 expect to see steep cuts in Trump's forthcoming budget request. In
 recent years, the National Science Foundation has received an annual
 budget of approximately $9 billion, the vast majority of which is
 spent on research and research-related activities. The CUTS COULD BE
 AS DEEP AS 66 PERCENT, with one person indicating the top-line budget
 number for the National Science Foundation could start at $3 billion.

 Such a massive cut is not out of line with a proposal made by Russ
 Vought for the fiscal year 2023 budget as part of his Center for
 Renewing America. Vought is expected to become the White House budget
 director in the coming days. Three years ago, Vought proposed cutting
 the National Science Foundation budget to $3.9 billion. The cuts, he
 wrote, would require NSF "to make better decisions and target grants
 to actual research that will benefit the whole country, not just
 propagandize for woke ideology."

 ...such cuts could prove disastrous for the US science community.
 "This kind of cut would kill American science and boost China and
 other nations into global science leadership positions," Neal Lane,
 who led the National Science Foundation in the 1990s during Bill
 Clinton's presidency, told Ars. "The National Science Foundation
 budget is not large, of the order 0.1 percent of federal spending, and
 several other agencies support excellence research. But NSF is the
 only agency charged to promote progress in science."

 ...Some fields, including astronomy, non-health-related biology, and
 Antarctic research, are all almost entirely underwritten by the
 National Science Foundation. The primary areas of its funding can be
 found here.

 Comments...

 It used to be that saboteurs worked in the shadows. Today they're
 being celebrated.

 When I see republicans asking for help when they are struck down and
 struggling from the consequences of their votes in the future, I will
 have some internal debate because I want to help people, and set a
 good example, because a good person will help someone when he has the
 ability to do so.  But I'll also want to just say "no, fuck you, you
 voted for this and now you can reap the whirlwind"

 -----------

 Related:  

 [2/7/25]: Tampa Bay News.  Push to move NASA HQ to Florida still abuzz
 among space community / NASA headquarters currently employs nearly
 2,500 people among its total workforce of nearly 18,000 civil
 employees.

 The idea floated earlier this month by Gov. Ron DeSantis that NASA
 might consider moving its headquarters from Washington to Florida
 remains a topic of interest in space circles.

 During a panel discussion about public-private partnerships during the
 commercial space convention SpaceCom’s final day at the Orange County
 Convention Center on Thursday, the top-voted question during a Q&A
 portion asked for panel members to weigh in on the idea of bringing
 the headquarters to Kennedy Space Center.  While there was laughter
 among the crowd, it still prompted an evenhanded answer from Jonathan
 Baker, chief of spaceport development at KSC.

 “We’re focused on exploration and innovation, and so we want to enable
 that in whatever way possible, right? So however the agency deems best
 to accomplish that here at KSC, we’re ready and on board to support
 that,” Baker said. “Whether that means a move for headquarters or
 not. We are ready to support whatever the agency needs to move
 forward.”

 Rob Long, CEO of Space Florida, the state’s aerospace finance and
 development authority, smiled and chimed in as well.  “I mean, it
 would make a lot of sense to move NASA headquarters to Kennedy Space
 Center,” Long said. “Just saying.”

 While the back-and-forth was made with some levity the idea isn’t
 completely unrealistic, especially in an era under President Trump’s
 second administration married with SpaceX founder and CEO Elon Musk’s
 push to cut government spending as head of the Department of
 Government Efficiency, Trump’s cost-cutting initiative known as DOGE.



2/8/25: WP.  NIH cuts billions of dollars in biomedical funding,
    effective immediately / Researchers say it would hurt facilities
    that work on medical issues such as cancer research and heart
    disease. Elon Musk contends the old policy was “a ripoff.”

 The Trump administration is cutting billions of dollars in biomedical
 research funding, alarming academic leaders who said it would imperil
 their universities and medical centers and drawing swift rebukes from
 Democrats who predicted dire consequences for scientific research.

 The move, announced Friday night by the National Institutes of Health,
 drastically cuts its funding for “indirect” costs related to
 research. These are the administrative requirements, facilities and
 other operations that many scientists say are essential but that some
 Republicans have claimed are superfluous.

 “The United States should have the best medical research in the world,”
 NIH said in its announcement. “It is accordingly vital to ensure that as
 many funds as possible go towards direct scientific research costs
 rather than administrative overhead.”

 In a social media post, NIH said the change would save more than $4
 billion a year, EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY. The note highlighted the
 multibillion-dollar endowments of Harvard University, Yale University
 and Johns Hopkins University, implying that many universities do not
 need the added federal funding.

     Last year, $9B of the $35B that the National Institutes of Health
     (NIH) granted for research was used for administrative overhead,
     what is known as “indirect costs.” Today, NIH lowered the maximum
     indirect cost rate research institutions can charge the government
     to 15%, above… 

 The NIH policy, essentially a massive budget cut to science and medical
 centers across the country, was quickly denounced as devastating by
 universities and research organizations.

 Some scientists said the move could threaten research already underway
 and noted that their universities have a fraction of the endowments of
 schools such as Harvard and Yale. Industry leaders also questioned
 whether the move was legal, pointing to existing law governing NIH funding.

 ...The funding is “part and parcel of the total costs of conducting world
 class research,” Owens added. “We are carefully reviewing this policy
 change as it contradicts current law and policy. America’s competitors
 will relish this self-inflicted wound.”

 Ted Mitchell, the president of the American Council on Education, a
 nonprofit that works with university leaders, said some labs were in the
 process of shutting down over the weekend.

 Mitchell warned [that unless the policy is blocked] that there
 will be “less biomedical innovation, and that is going to contribute
 to higher degrees of disease and death in the country.”

 Trump allies hailed NIH’s move. The U.S. DOGE Service, the office led by
 billionaire Elon Musk that has focused on slashing government spending,
 said NIH’s new policy would save billions of dollars in “excessive grant
 administrative costs” and praised the “amazing job by NIH team” in a
 post on social media.

 “Can you believe that universities with tens of billions in endowments
 were siphoning off 60% of research award money for ‘overhead’?” Musk
 wrote in his own post, contending that the old policy was “a ripoff.”

 Republicans in recent years had weighed cutting federal funds for
 overhead costs at universities, with the first Trump administration
 abandoning a plan to do so amid pressure from biomedical leaders.

 Democrats immediately castigated the Trump administration, saying NIH’s
 move would imperil clinical research, patient care and laboratory
 operations, among other health-care priorities.

 “Just because Elon Musk doesn’t understand indirect costs doesn’t mean
 Americans should have to pay the price with their lives,” Sen. Patty
 Murray (D-Washington) said in a statement.

 Murray, the top Democrat on the Senate’s appropriations panel, also
 pointed to bipartisan legislation that she oversaw last year and has
 been enacted into law, which she noted banned changes to how NIH funds
 overhead costs. The new policy is “illegal and arbitrary,” Murray
 said.

 ...[Indirect costs] amount is a percentage of the direct research
 costs in the grant and varies by institution. But it can be more than
 half of the direct costs. A research award for $100,000 in direct
 costs, for example, could come with $50,000 in indirect costs, making
 the total grant $150,000.

 In fiscal 2023, out of $35 billion in awarded grants, $9 billion went to
 overhead, NIH said.

 In its announcement, NIH said that on average, the overhead rate has
 been about 27 to 28 percent of the direct research funding in the grant
 but that “many organizations” charge indirect rates of over 50 percent
 and in some cases more than 60 percent. The agency’s new policy will cap
 the rate at 15 percent and TAKE EFFECT ON MONDAY, cutting tens of
 millions of dollars or more in funding for many universities — VIRTUALLY
 OVERNIGHT.

 ...“I expect it will cause some universities to not be able to afford to
 accept federal life science grants. I am at a loss to understand how
 this is beneficial to Americans,” Zuber added.

 ...“This abrupt change in the way grants are funded will have
 devastating consequences on medical science,” said Rathmell...“Many
 people will lose jobs, clinical trials will halt, and this will slow
 down progress toward cures for cancer and effective prevention of
 illness.”

 ...“A sane government would never do this,” [Jeffrey] Flier wrote on
 social media.

 Several researchers said that NIH’s high rate of funding for indirect
 costs helped subsidize the infrastructure necessary for their work —
 everything from a building’s heating and electricity to personnel. They
 also said that the government’s willingness to fund indirect costs at
 more than 50 percent balanced out the lower rate that researchers tend
 to receive from private foundations, which were more likely to fund 15
 percent of the indirect costs.

 NIH said it was cutting its rate of funding indirect costs to be more in
 line with private foundations that fund research, noting that many
 foundations do not fund indirect costs at all.

 Researchers also said it was misleading for NIH to selectively
 highlight some university endowments in its social media post
 announcing the new policy. The schools’ endowments, a collection of
 tax-exempt donations and investments, have limitations that make it
 difficult for schools to radically draw them down, and portions of the
 endowments can be restricted to uses that donors stipulate.

 Republicans had weighed similar measures in the past. President Donald
 Trump in 2017 proposed capping indirect costs at 10 percent, but the
 effort did not succeed.

 ...But some Trump officials said they were wary of the sudden policy
 change, noting the immediate blowback across academia, and predicted
 that the move would be opposed by GOP lawmakers worried about the
 effect on their constituents.  “Red states have universities too,” one
 Trump official, speaking on the condition of anonymity**because they
 were not authorized to speak to the press, wrote in a message.

 Correction: A previous version of this article misstated the
    percentage of overhead funding that NIH said is in research. In
    its announcement, NIH said on average, the overhead rate has been
    about 27 to 28 percent, not 27 to 38 percent. The article has been
    corrected.

 4056 Comments...

 What we've learned very quickly is that any statement coming out of
 the White House or its allies in Congress regarding any agency or
 department should be assumed to be a lie. The Post rarely gets up the
 nerve to say so, but The NY Times is giving lots of evidence of that
 on pretty much a daily basis. The administration's accusations about
 spending by the USAID, for example, are pretty much all made up
 hogwash.

 Let's be very clear: TRUMP'S ACTIONS WILL RESULT IN PEOPLE DYING!
 It's that simple.

 Indirect costs on government contracts to defense companies (Lockheed,
 Northrop Grumman, etc) are routinely over 100%. When can we expect
 those to be capped at 15% as well? Indirect costs on SpaceX contracts
 are over 50%. When will that be cut to 15%? This is utter madness.

 “A sane government would never do this" But a government run by a
 revengeful lying psychopath and one a self confessed Asperger
 personality would. Between Trump and Musk they have no conscience,
 decency, empathy, integrity, knowledge or wisdom.

 How do you do research without the buildings to do it in and the
 equipment with which to do it?  We’re going to wind up, in four years,
 as a very large third world country, run into the ground by a demented
 despot.

 I am a physician scientist at Johns Hopkins. This move by Fuehrer
 Trump will devastate my university as it immediately cuts the budget
 by 30%. We will need to close cancer trials and fire a good part of
 our work force. Research labs will close. We all lose.

 all this so rich people can avoid paying their taxes. 

 This is insane. Without workspace and assistants, what research can be
 conducted? Researchers will quit without funding...And the
 cruelty. Those people who lose their jobs immediately still have house
 payments to make.

 President Musk’s doge-bag stormtroopers strike again.

 While the U.S. government weakens its scientific leadership, Canada
 stands ready to welcome top researchers with open arms. Our robust
 research infrastructure, public healthcare system, and strong federal
 and provincial support for life sciences make Canada an ideal
 destination for those whose work is now imperiled. The loss for the
 U.S. could be Canada's gain—talented scientists should look north,
 where their research will be valued and sustained.

 I am a medical oncologist who runs clinical trials evaluating new
 cancer fighting medications. I cannot emphasize enough: We are so
 totally screwed.

 Egg prices were high, and you didn't like the way she laughed.
 You fooking morons.

    [Hey!  Another Trump campaign promise fulfilled!  Nobody has to
    worry about paying high prices for eggs anymore because, as NBC
    reported tonight, in many areas THERE ARE NO EGGS AVAILABLE AT ANY
    PRICE.  Just forget about them.]

 At one time, I was a federal contracting officer, handling both
 contracts and grants. I understand overhead charges, all cost based
 contracts and grants include a line item for overhead, or
 administrative costs. These overhead rates are audited and approved by
 government audit agencies. What I would like to see is a copy of Eli
 Musk's government contracts, pretty sure we will find he is being paid
 overhead costs.

 I am not sure how to explain how devastating this is to our global
 scientific standing. NIH is the golden standard for human research
 from diabetes to cardiovascular disease, cancer, pediatric diseases,
 addiction and public health etc. They are gutting our research
 institutions, they are destroying our scientific progress and higher
 education communities.  Also the indirect cost covers the salaries and
 livelihood of millions of employees not just scientists.  I do agree
 reforming is needed, but this is NOT reform . This is destruction by a
 fascist movement.  By the way we got the notice Friday night around 9
 pm EST.

 I never realized that cancer research, which requires state-of-the-art
 facilities, was part of a "leftist agenda."

 Ah yes...Shock and Awe...at 77 years old I'm watching the destruction
 of my beloved America by the most vile and evil traitors in our
 history. I've watched it creep since Reagan; I studied it at Yale and
 saw it in all its Gory with the election of trump in 2016.

 Yes indeed, Red States have huge medical centers funded by the NIH.
 MD Anderson in Texas is a massive operation. Well done, Texas, you
 played yourselves.

 Trump to ill Americans: Just die already!

 We’re now dependent on foreign countries for new medicine.  The
 Republican Party is the dumbest political party on the planet. The
 developing world is going to move past us in most industries now.
 Only a republican would hand world hegemony to communist china

 If you are outside research/academia this might be hard to fully grasp
 so let me try to clarify.  To do our work, we need safe, secure, and
 clean buildings. We need running water, the lights on, the exhaust
 systems intact. We need chemical fume hoods, biosafety cabinets,
 incubators filled with CO2 to do our experiments safely, and without
 contamination. We need an animal facility and caretakers to ensure our
 animals are being used humanely. We need to dispose of our chemicals
 and sharps safely. These are just some of the indirect costs.  The
 direct costs include salary support (often NIH grants do not cover
 100% of a PIs salary and we need to do multiple things to have a
 decent salary), the reagents we use, gloves we wear, pipette tips we
 need, kits we use are all direct costs. These are prohibitively
 expensive- a single antibody may cost hundreds or dollars and
 different media for cell culture is also hundreds of dollars for a
 500mL bottle. Housing animals (which unfortunately are the best way we
 have to mimic human physiology) is costly. It adds up quickly.  If you
 want to cut the rates, renegotiate with the universities. But maybe
 you can see how a lab in NYC costs more to run than maybe Kansas and
 why IDCs vary.  It’s pretty scary to be at a university doing research
 right now.

 Indirect costs are supporting administrators who ensure we spend funds
 according to federal rules, building maintenance, energy costs and
 safety monitoring. Standard NIH grants have not been
 inflation-corrected for 20 years. We are already operating on a
 shoestring budget, needing ingenuity and support from our universities
 to remain productive, and we are. Building a career and being
 productive in such a system has been very tough, but also very
 rewarding. Everyone who is still in it is among the smartest and most
 productive in the world, a true blessing for this country. This move
 by the Musk/Trump administration will kneecap US biomedical research,
 exactly at a time where China's biotech industry is becoming a serious
 competitor.  I am also a cancer survivor. I am cancer free because of
 a robotic surgical technique my brilliant colleagues developed at my
 medical school, validated in a NIH-funded clinical trial. The
 infrastructure supporting them will be gone soon when indirect rate
 cuts become permanent, and this will cause huge damage and make our
 state's population less healthy. But I think this is the
 intention. They must be stopped for all of our sakes.

 And what does the Republican Congress, who approved those funds say?
 Oh, yeah. "Thank you sir, Trump, may I have another."

 Note that Big Pharma spends more on advertising than it does on R&D,
 but of course the US will never free up some of that money by banning
 ads for prescription drugs ("ask your doctor if a little black capsule
 that solves all your problems is right for you").

 It's really important to understand how these numbers work. If the
 overhead is 55%, it means that for $1M of planned research, the
 government sends $1.55M, which is closer to 35%. This 35% is used for
 things hazardous waste disposal and other things that scientists are
 not allowed to manage individually (for darn good reasons), but also
 jobs for accountants, janitors, IT, and all the things that need to
 exist in order for the scientists to work.  Capping this rate at 15%
 when a rate was previously 55% means basically 73% cut in critical
 infrastructure that enables research. Researchers will not be able to
 continue their work without these things. This is not a "rip off"


 ======

 [2/8-9/2025]:   DFT --- ***NOT SENT***

 At first I thought these moves were the reflexive random thrashing of
 mindless zealots...but now it looks like they are part of a
 cold-blooded, deliberate and malicious attack on the underpinnings of
 the US scientific enterprise. I can't judge the extent to which these
 people understand the consequences of what they're doing, but I
 suspect they don't care.  They seem eager to produce a Gaza-like
 wasteland for American science.

 This is a fundamental assault on university finances.  Again, it's
 undoubtedly illegal as it stands because indirect costs are actually
 negotiated contractually between the federal government and
 individual universities.

 The negotiated rates cover all parts of university operations that
 cannot be specifically assigned to an individual research project:
 utilities; building space; infrastructure maintenance; centralized
 computer and internet services; libraries and data management; health
 and safety operations; emergency services; insurance; and general
 administrative functions like grant administration, payroll,
 personnel, purchasing, government compliance offices, audit services,
 etc.  Universities are subject to the same level of scrutiny as any
 other government contractor in the private sector.

 There is no peacetime precedent for cutting off funds for
 already-approved research allocations.  Scientific research programs
 normally take years to develop and mature.  Serious damage will be
 done by interruptions in support even if funds are restored later.
 In particular, key personnel may have to find other jobs; and in the
 life/health sciences long-running experiments, clinical studies and
 other time-critical projects can suffer catastrophic damage.

 The attack on ID costs is based on ignorance or a deliberate
 misunderstanding of federal grants and contracts.  If they were
 serious about it, this would apply to all the contracting the federal
 government does, including with defense contractors and the companies
 that Elon Musk runs.

 Unfortunately, because it's claimed to address "wasteful
 overhead," it may well find more sympathy in Congress. and the
 imposition of some kind of cap is not unlikely.  There's a parallel
 movement to tax the annual income from university endowments.

 And you'd think these fools would care about the overall economic
 impact.  Cuts across the government will have negative consequences.
 Watch the unemployment rate soar (especially in Virginia).  Watch
 unemployment insurance run dry.  Watch the GDP take a hit, because
 every dollar of federal spending generates multiple dollars of
 economic activity.  Watch the GOP take a bad hit in the 2025 elections
 in Virginia.  


 [Based on FY 22 ann report, annual federal grant revenue to UVa is
    about $400M.

    F&A rate is 61.5% (!)

    Direct costs are therefore %400M/1.61 = $250M

       while F&A earnings are 0.61 x $250M = $150M

    Under a 15% F&A cap, the total revenue would be 1.15 X $250 =
       $288M, and F&A earnings would be 0.15 x $250 = $38M.

    There would be NET LOSS of $112M/year in F&A revenues.  ]


 Related, from the 5/13/25 faculty meeting:  

    SRM claims the impact of a 15% ID cap would be a $10M hit to CAS.
    Mostly in startup packages.  CAS budget is $452M overall this
    year.  BoV increased tuition 3% for next year, but policy after
    that unclear.

        [The "$10M hit" underestimates the ultimate impact.  That's
        the loss of discretionary funds allocated to A&S.  But UVa as
        a whole will be on the hook to replace the loss of something
        like $100M in indirect cost allocations to run its
        infrastructure and support functions.  It's going to be next
        to impossible to squeeze that out of current operating funds
        without serious effects on academic operations.  $100M is on
        the order of 800 staff members' full-time compensation.  Are
        we going to fire them all?  If the new ID cap becomes policy,
        almost certainly this means a faculty and staff hiring freeze
        for some years, reduction of grad student support, freeze on
        capital projects and new initiatives, poorer academic support
        services (e.g. computing, internet), no access to
        discretionary endowment income, etc.  ]

     Effects of announced restructuring of NSF are unclear but could
     be deleterious to astronomy.  The Astronomy Division will
     disappear, leaving us subject to less knowledgeable and
     sympathetic overseers.

 ======



2/12/25: SPACEREF via NASA Watch <https://nasawatch.com/>

Planetary Science Institute
February 12, 2025

  Opinion: Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility Are Important
  for the Workplace and Science

    by Mark V. Sykes, Ph.D., J.D. – CEO and Director, Planetary
       Science Institute

To the American Public and Government Officials:

I would like to share a positive perspective of diversity, equity,
inclusion and accessibility from the context of a science institute. At
a time when these principles are being purged by our government from a
large swath of federal programs, you should know they actually advance
science, thereby advancing the interests of our country, and are
important for the workplace. In the course of this, I would also like to
take this opportunity to show you that scientists share much of your
experiences and backgrounds as people, and something about the process
of science itself.

The Planetary Science Institute takes pride in the accomplishments and
discoveries of our scientists as they pursue our mission of exploring
the Solar System and solar systems around other stars, pursuing
questions of origins, life, and how everything works.

Our scientists are highly trained, highly skilled, and are supported by
dedicated administrative and support staff that are likewise deeply
experienced and remarkable. We open our doors widely to all those who
are passionate about pursuing this work and sharing it with the
scientific community and general public.

This work is not for the faint of heart, as it is supported through
openly competed and limited sources of funding primarily from NASA and
other agencies. To maximize our success as an institute in this context,
we seek to attract people from all walks of life.

Our institute and its mission are apolitical. Our scientists range from
strong supporters of the current administration to those who deeply
oppose it to those who don’t particularly care or have other political
interests. We have scientists of a broad range of national origins,
race, and gender identities. Our scientists are Evangelical Christians,
Jews, Mormons, Catholics, Muslims, Buddhists, Atheists, and other
religious and non-religious persuasions. Some are veterans. Our
scientists have diverse personalities and a wide range of interpersonal
skills. Some have physical challenges, some are neurodiverse, and
everyone comes from a wide range of economic and cultural backgrounds.
This is diversity. We value it. We encourage it. We want it.

Diversity is a strength of our Institute and a strength to our science.
How can that be? Science depends not just on technical skill and
knowledge, but more importantly on imagination. We use our imagination
when identifying questions raised by our observations of the universe
around us, then gaining new understanding in answering those questions,
and then to determine how we can challenge our newfound understanding.
Scientific insights can spring from a recent research paper, a
conversation with a friend, a religious experience, a dream, or watching
a basketball game. As we work together, we share our ideas from our
different perspectives and experiences. The vast range of insights
facilitated by increasing diversity maximizes the quality and range of
the science that we produce. This is true for all science.

We want to retain our talented employees and enable them to engage in
meaningful work, so it is important to provide a positive, engaging
and supportive work environment. To realize this, we commit to being a
community dedicated to excellence in our work and helping each other
to be successful in our professional and even personal endeavors. We
value each other and our families. We value everyone’s
opinions – even when we do not agree with them. We listen
to each other. We are honest with each other. We always treat each
other fairly with dignity and respect. We acknowledge when a person
has been wronged and work to rectify it justly. This is equity.

Science is a naturally inclusive human endeavor unconfined to a single
institution or profession. It is largely a cooperative, even global
enterprise, inclusive of many communities. Inclusion supports our desire
for growing diversity to add to what we have. We also want to create
more diversity by reaching out to the general public, including
communities of people that have little participation in our field or
even science in general. We want to inspire them, teach them, and
hopefully motivate them, sometimes by giving them some participatory
experience in our science. We actually do this as a regular matter for
all the communities in which we live.

We are committed to enabling all staff members to reach their full
potential. Therefore, we are committed to providing accessibility. When
employees need help with accessibility to do their jobs, we do whatever
we can to help. This goes beyond just providing a special chair or a
large computer screen. Accessibility by PSI is sometimes provided by
time. Time to deal with intrusions of life, recognizing this can be
significantly constrained in some businesses. Accessibility promotes
productivity and a positive work environment.

Always striving to promote diversity, equity, inclusion, and
accessibility enhances our ability to advance our mission objectives and
promotes the betterment of our science. Denouncing these principles and
degrading their use is harmful to our science and to American
competitiveness in the world. It worries me that such rhetoric has often
presaged violence against those who are perceived to benefit from the
denounced activity. Many of our scientists are concerned for their
future and even physical safety. There are legitimate complaints
regarding some activities undertaken under the rubric of these
principles. However, I would like to see those specific objections
considered and addressed in a fashion that is narrowly tailored to
relieve any wrong being committed while maintaining and building on all
the good we have achieved.

Mark V. Sykes, Ph.D., J.D.
CEO and Director
Planetary Science Institute

      5 responses 

 1.
    billinpasadena says:        
    February 12, 2025 at 10:11 pm

    It's not quite clear how these values of any good workplace require
    an expensive addition to the administration to be accomplished. Was
    PSI failing before they added a DEI office? And why did some
    universities with complex DEI bureaucracies fail so badly in free
    speech and welcoming outside speakers with heterodox views?

        Keith Cowing says:      
        February 13, 2025 at 6:36 pm
       
        I'm sorry -- is there a cogent point in your word salad? Just
        wondering.

 2.
    Steven Parnell says:        
    February 13, 2025 at 10:44 am

    Really Keith? Noting else going on at NASA? The amount of
    attention given to this is ridiculous. I've been at NASA for
    almost 40 years and I can tell you that over the last 4+ years of
    dealing with these DEI "directives" has caused more harm to the
    collective than any good to the outcomes of the mission of the
    agency. I know that among many I talk to, there was a sigh of
    relief with the recent EO's to end this. China is about to beat us
    with a crewed mission to Mars (probably by the end of this decade)
    and we need a force of "unity" within NASA to accomplishing the
    necessary advancements to getting there first! The only "flag" at
    NASA that matters is the American flag planted by a crew on the
    surface of Mars.

    I've followed Nasawatch for decades and for the most part it was
    very informative, however, lately the echo chamber of an ideology
    has infected it to the point of being irrelevant.  Per Audacia Ad
    Astra!

      *
        Keith Cowing says:      
        February 13, 2025 at 6:35 pm
     
        Well I guess I won't be missing you either. I am leaving your
        comments up given that they are a classic example of the
        ignorance and intolerance that pervades the space community
        these days. Oh yes -- you say you have been at NASA for almost 40
        years yet Google and the NASA.gov search engine seem to find no
        evidence of that. But your IP says that you are online via the
        University of Colorado in Boulder. No NASA centers there. Google
        shows no connections. So -- I guess you do not actually exist.
        Have a nice day.

 3.
    DP Huntsman says:   
    February 13, 2025 at 12:54 pm
    
    Well said, Dr Sykes! I'll all but guarantee you that those who take
    issue with your position, though, will NOT say anything fact-or-data
    based in rejoinder, but just cast aspersions (or words that sound
    like aspersions). Thank you very much for speaking up.

    As far as Steven Parnell's take -- spent 46 years at the agency
    before retiring, and it's like he hasn't even read what Dr Sykes
    has written. ANYTHING- including those efforts lumped under the
    term DEI - can be run more efficiently. But in aerospace, we have
    historically Not done an excellent - automatic - job at outreach
    to ensure NASA et al heard from ALL walks of people in this hugely
    diverse country, unless we were forced to make sure we were doing
    it. It Never just happened naturally - still, to this day.
    Centuries and in the case of women, millennia- of habits don't get
    changed on a dime; and DEI's sole purpose is to first recognize
    that- and then pro-actively do something about it, no excuses.

    Thanks again, Dr Sykes.

    Dave Huntsman


2/12/25: 

 xFrom rwo@virginia.edu Wed Feb 12 18:02:26 2025
 Date: Wed, 12 Feb 2025 18:02:24
 From: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
 To: "David.Leckrone@nasa.gov" <David.Leckrone@nasa.gov>
 Subject: Bad old days are back

 Hi Dave:

 When I was reading about the Trump-Musk administration trying
 to fire essential agency personnel for no reason, your name naturally
 popped into my head.

 Trump is the best argument to be retired and watching it all from
 the sidelines (at least I hope that's where we are).

 Hope all is well with you.

      Cheers,

	 Bob

 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
   Robert W. O'Connell
     J. D. Hamilton Professor of Astronomy, Emeritus
   Astronomy Department              Email: rwo@virginia.edu
   University of Virginia            Phone: [434] 823-6154
   P.O. Box 400325
   Charlottesville, VA 22904-4325    https://rwoconne.github.io/profile
   USA
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------


2/21/25: <https://www.chronicle.com/> THE RISE (AND FALL?) OF THE
     NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION / In the ’50s, America declared
     science an ‘endless frontier.’ We may be reaching the end of it.

   URL:  https://www.chronicle.com/article/the-rise-and-fall-of-the-national-science-foundation

 The Review | Essay
 By Carly Anne York

 For most of the past century, the United States has been the global
 leader in scientific discovery. In just the last five years, American
 scientists have won more Nobel Prizes than the rest of the world
 combined. But we weren’t always leaders in scientific advancement. It
 wasn’t until the 1950 establishment of the National Science Foundation
 (NSF), the largest funding source for basic research in the country,
 that America became a powerhouse of modernization.

 Under the Trump administration, the same system that boosted the
 United States to scientific dominance is being recklessly
 dismantled. In the past few weeks, the newly created Department of
 Government Efficiency has ordered the NSF to reduce its staff by 25-50
 percent to meet strict new budget targets. They have already fired 168
 workers. Even more alarming, the administration is considering
 slashing the NSF’s $9-billion budget to just $3-4 billion,
 jeopardizing funding for thousands of scientists and their
 research. Beyond budget cuts, political interference is reshaping the
 NSF’s priorities. A recent executive order from President Trump
 mandates a review of all funded projects for flagged terms associated
 with DEI initiatives such as “gender,” “ethnicity” and “systemic.” Any
 projects containing these words must be modified to comply with the
 order or risk losing funding. Not only does this policy effectively
 roll back critical diversity initiatives, it will make research into
 important topics like health care much more difficult to fund.

 Because many scientists conduct their work at universities, these
 policies are a profound threat to higher education. Many of the
 technologies and medical breakthroughs we rely on today**— from
 computers to Viagra — were first developed within university research
 labs. American universities’ renowned science programs attract the
 brightest minds from around the world. In fact, 43 percent of
 America’s STEM work force was born in other countries. This is due
 both to the quality of education in our university system and the
 groundbreaking scientific advancements made within these institutions
 — made possible in large part by the National Science Foundation.

 It is important to understand how funds from an NSF grant are
 distributed to universities. In 2024 the NSF had a total budget of
 about $9 billion to support scientists around the country across all
 disciplines, including biology, geology, chemistry, mathematics,
 physics, psychology, sociology, and even some parts of engineering and
 computer science. Compared to the $841-billion budget for the
 Department of Defense, this is a drop in the bucket of the total
 national budget. With that $9 billion, around 11,000 projects were
 awarded funds. Of those 11,000 projects, the average NSF research
 grant in 2024 was approximately $150,000. That money covers the
 salaries plus benefits of graduate students in the lab. Often this
 salary is somewhere around $25,000 and for the length of the grant
 (typically 3 years). And then there is the university’s overhead, or
 “indirect costs,” a certain percentage of the total grant that goes to
 the university for keeping the lights on. This portion varies by
 institution and typically ranges anywhere from 20-80 percent of the
 requested costs, though this also might soon change under the Trump
 administration. Slashing the budget of the NSF even further will
 devastate the engines of discovery and innovation without making a
 dent in the overall national budget.


 In recent decades, the National Science Foundation has paid for
 billions of dollars of basic research each year, but this was not
 always the case. Traditionally, American science was supported by
 philanthropists and other powerful people. In fact, before World War
 II, government funding was incredibly rare in the United States,
 mostly granted to aeronautics and agriculture studies. This meant that
 to fund their research, scientists needed to be able to convince
 someone rich that their research was valuable. For example, Alexander
 Graham Bell, the famous inventor of the telephone, got most of the
 money for his invention from the wealthy father of one of his
 students. He eventually married that student, securing his line of
 funding.

 Although funding throughout the 19th and the early 20th century was
 limited, faculty members were still expected to engage in research in
 addition to teaching. Herbert Hoover, the U.S. secretary of commerce
 from 1921-28, was concerned by the lack of financial support for basic
 research. Up to this point, the United States largely let the rest of
 the world lead the way in scientific discovery. Hoover saw this as a
 national weakness and campaigned to establish a national research
 endowment to support university research with funds provided by
 industry. Though Hoover was adamant that the future of the nation
 depended on our scientific prowess, industry failed to see how they
 would benefit from research that might not lead to an immediate
 application. They declined to provide funds, and Hoover’s endowment
 never came to fruition. It wasn’t until 1940 that President Franklin D.
 Roosevelt approved the National Defense Research Committee, the
 forerunner to today’s National Science Foundation.

     Slashing the budget of the NSF even further will devastate the
     engines of discovery and innovation without making a dent in the
     overall national budget.

 The pivotal figure in the shift to government funding of science was
 Vannevar Bush, the former vice president of the Massachusetts
 Institute of Technology. At the time of his tenure, MIT relied on
 corporate sponsors to fund their labs. This was unusual; most
 institutions depended on student tuition, private philanthropy, and
 grants from local industries for funding. After the stock market crash
 of 1929, however, the university found itself struggling to stay
 afloat. Most administrators of private universities felt that the
 government had no business in higher education, and their peers at
 public universities largely agreed. But with the Depression looming,
 Bush decided to reconsider federal funding for his university. He had
 the idea of creating contracts with the federal government to support
 basic research across all scientific disciplines. In 1938, Bush was
 elected president of the Carnegie Institution, which afforded him the
 platform to influence federal scientific policy. He oversaw the
 creation of the National Defense Research Committee in June 1940,
 which awarded thousands of research contracts to universities across
 the country under his watch. By 1945, 90 percent of MIT’s annual
 operating budget came from federal research contracts.

 The National Defense Research Committee was created with the goal of
 advancing technological development for World War II. Before the war,
 university scientists and the military stayed largely in their own
 lanes. In fact, there had been a lack of cooperation between civilian
 scientists and the U.S. military during WWI, and the feelings of
 contempt ran both ways. Scientists at the time considered the enlistment
 of their skills for the military as a “desecration upon the temple of
 science,” as the historian Daniel Kevles put it. At the same time, any
 scientists who did try to work with the military ran into a wall of
 prejudice: Military officers didn’t believe scientists to be as
 qualified as service members. In fact, in the 1930s some scientists had
 tried to collaborate with the armed services but were told that no
 civilian could match a service member’s judgement about the practicality
 of new weapons. These attitudes were of great concern for Bush, who
 wanted to use the power of science to enhance the U.S. military. By
 helping channel federal funding directly to scientists, he was able to
 mend this fissure, and both parties came to see the benefit of this
 relationship. Scientists had the financial means to perform high-quality
 research, and the military had access to the brightest minds in the
 country. With Bush’s guidance, the National Defense Research Committee
 supported the development of radar, sonar, the mass production of
 penicillin, and (most controversially) the Manhattan Project. Without a
 doubt, this new funding system greatly increased the power of the U.S.
 military.

 The collaboration between scientists and the military was thriving under
 the National Defense Research Committee, and Roosevelt asked Bush to
 consider how the organization could be extended into peacetime. In
 response, Bush penned a report entitled “Science, the Endless Frontier,”
 proposing what would eventually become the National Science Foundation.
 The report highlighted the boundless potential of basic science. Despite
 Bush’s intimate involvement with military operations, his report
 emphasized that “the most important ways in which the Government can
 promote industrial research are to increase the flow of new scientific
 knowledge through support of basic research and to aid in the
 development of scientific talent.”

 Bush’s grand vision finally materialized in 1950, when President Harry
 S. Truman signed a bill creating the National Science Foundation to
 support fundamental research and education across all fields of science
 and engineering within universities. There were several reasons Bush
 felt that universities were the best place for scientific discovery. The
 success of science depended on an atmosphere that was “relatively free
 from the adverse pressure of convention, prejudice, or commercial
 necessity,” while providing security and intellectual freedom to its
 researchers. Bush understood that new knowledge can create opposition,
 since it often challenges current beliefs. That could be a barrier to
 true discovery within government and industry.

 Although the partnership between academe and the government had been
 largely successful, Bush recognized the risks of relying on federal
 funding for research. Anticipating potential conflicts, he established
 fundamental principles to safeguard the integrity of federally funded
 science. These principles emphasized stable support for university
 research while ensuring complete autonomy in methodology, personnel, and
 the scope of inquiry. Bush was not alone in his apprehensions; others
 have echoed concerns over the decades. During the 1960s, as the Vietnam
 War escalated, students across the country protested military funding of
 universities, highlighting the tension between government influence and
 academic independence. The Trump administration’s assault on the NSF
 represents precisely the kind of political interference Bush sought to
 prevent — one that threatens not only scientific progress but also the
 very foundation of academic freedom.

     Undermining the NSF is not just a threat to universities and
     researchers — it is a threat to the well-being of every American.

 Thanks to Bush’s vision, American universities have not only been
 powerhouses for discovery — they have also been the training ground for
 new scientific talent. Bush was concerned about the cost of higher
 education, which might force the country into “neglecting great talent
 among those who fail to attend college for economic reasons.” His
 solution was the mosaic of grants and fellowships that the National
 Science Foundation now supports. He proposed that these grants include
 undergraduate scholarships, graduate fellowships, and support for
 advanced training. Since the initiation of the NSF Graduate Research
 Fellowship in 1952, an estimated 70,000 graduate students have been
 supported while earning their advanced degrees in various scientific
 disciplines. According the 2024 NSF Financial Report
 <https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2025/nsf25002/index.jsp>, 357,600 people were
 directly supported this past year, including researchers, postdoctoral
 fellows, trainees, teachers, and students. Outside these figures, NSF
 programs indirectly impact millions of people, from pre-K to college
 students, through educational curricula such as museums and outreach
 programs.

 Since its inception, the NSF has played a pivotal role in establishing
 the United States as a global leader in scientific discovery. But this
 is not the first time its funding has faced serious threats. In recent
 years, Congress slashed the 2024 NSF budget by 8 percent as part of a
 bill to avert a partial government shutdown. The latest proposals from
 the Trump administration are just another chapter in a recurring pattern
 of underinvestment in science. This weakening of scientific focus is
 already taking a toll on the United States’ global standing. By several
 key metrics, we are losing ground to China, which has already surpassed
 the United States in the number of science and engineering Ph.D.s
 awarded and the volume of research published in top-tier scientific
 journals. If we continue to fall behind, the consequences will extend
 far beyond a diminished global reputation. Scientific research drives
 innovation, fuels new industries, creates high-tech jobs, and
 strengthens the economy. It enhances public health, secures our food
 supply, and advances climate science. Undermining the NSF is not just a
 threat to universities and researchers — it is a threat to the
 well-being of every American.

 If the Trump administration truly seeks to make America great, it must
 recognize that sustained investment in the NSF is essential for
 scientific progress and national prosperity. Ensuring this future,
 however, requires action — not just from scientists, but from the
 public as well. Across the country, researchers and advocates are
 mobilizing against the dismantling of our nation’s scientific
 infrastructure.  Graduate students nationwide have organized Stand Up
 for Science, an initiative calling on scientists and citizens to rally
 in Washington, D.C., on March 7 in defense of research and
 innovation. As budgets continue to shrink, more protests are sure to
 follow. This is a critical moment for American science and the future
 it shapes. We cannot afford to be silent.

 Read other items in this What Will Trump's Presidency Mean for Higher
 Ed? <https://www.chronicle.com/package/donald-trump-and-higher-ed/>
 package.


2/14/25:  Nature.  NASA embraced diversity. Trump's DEI purge is
hitting space scientists hard / Some researchers at NASA and outside
it feel betrayed by the changes at the agency, which was known for
promoting inclusion in science.

In the corridors of NASA buildings across the United States, Pride
flags and pictures celebrating women in science are being taken
down. Scientists are adding space-mission stickers to their laptops to
cover ones that displayed rainbows and other symbols of LGBT+
support. Employees are stripping pronouns from their e-mail signatures
and holding darkly humorous conversations in which they try to avoid
saying any pronouns at all.

These and other changes are rippling through NASA, which is purging
programmes involving diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) throughout
the agency. The directive to do so came from US President Donald
Trump, who on 20 January issued an order to eliminate DEI initiatives
across the federal government...

Nature spoke with scientists inside and outside NASA about the impacts
of its DEI changes -- and heard anger, fear and confusion. Although
the orders affect all federal agencies, they are keenly felt at NASA,
which has a long history of working towards inclusivity. In 2020,
Trump appointee Jim Bridenstine, then head of NASA, ADDED INCLUSION TO
THE AGENCY'S LIST OF CORE VALUES, joining safety, integrity, teamwork
and excellence. That fifth value has now been removed from many NASA
websites.

"How do you go from something being so important that it's a pillar
[of the agency], to being so reviled that it's off of everything?"
asks Julie Rathbun, a planetary scientist at Cornell University in
Ithaca, New York.

...In a statement, NASA said the agency “is committed to
engaging the best talent to drive innovation and achieve our mission
for the benefit of all. As new guidance comes in, we’re
working to adhere to new requirements in a timely manner.”
A changed agency

NASA's push towards inclusivity is one of the most visible in the US
government. In the 1950s and 1960s, all of the agency's astronauts
were white men. By 1978, it had bowed to internal and external
pressure and had chosen several women and people of colour to fly to
space. Today, NASA's astronauts, as well as its world-renowned
scientific and engineering teams, are measurably diverse.

But signs of NASA's efforts to make space for everyone are
disappearing. These removals have been triggered both by official
edicts -- such as the requirement to remove pronouns from employees'
email signatures --  and by unofficial notices, such as
verbal suggestions to remove flags or other displays from workspaces.

Trump's changes have also halted projects by employee affinity
organizations -- groups ranging from military veterans, to Asian
Americans and Pacific Islanders, to Black employees. Before 20
January, NASA celebrated these groups' efforts with many glowing,
now-deleted web articles.

...Other cancellations include a programme that paired undergraduates
from underrepresented groups with active planetary missions, giving
the students a chance to observe scientists at work.

Many NASA employees are angry about the changes to DEI, but are
buckling down to work nevertheless. "We believe in the mission, and we
know that our work is important," says the senior scientist. "We know
that it matters for the nation."

As federal workers, NASA employees can't push back against the
changes, no matter how much they personally support DEI efforts, says
Knicely, who co-chairs a community working group on best practices for
DEI at NASA. But space scientists outside NASA are voicing their
frustration with the agency's rejection of years of progress towards a
more diverse community. Several of them wrote an open letter to NASA
leadership on 6 February protesting the changes, which has garnered
more than 1,000 signatures.

Many of those scientists have been working with NASA for years on DEI
issues. For example, researchers have been studying the DEI practices
that improve science, and have been working with NASA to integrate
those approaches into its funding programmes. These include a system
for ANONYMOUS REVIEW OF PROPOSALS to use facilities such as the Hubble
Space Telescope -- a change that reduces gender and other biases --
and REQUIRING INCLUSION PLANS IN AGENCY-FUNDED RESEARCH GRANTS, which
raises awareness of barriers to participation.

    [Yes, see 7/25/24 article in CHED by Robert George and Anna Krylov
    and comments in Jerry Coyne's blog.  A clear sense that the
    agency has gone too far and is undertaking an exercise in
    political theater rather than introducing pragmatic ways
    of improving demographic balance.]

Viewed broadly, the cuts "basically say that Indigenous peoples,
underrepresented peoples, even women don't really belong there at
NASA," says Hilding Neilson, an astronomer at the Memorial University
of Newfoundland in St John's, Canada and a Mi'kmaw person. "That's a
horrible and shameful thing that is going to set NASA back decades, if
not longer."

Some researchers inside and outside the agency are doubling down on
their scientific and technical projects while living according to
their values as best they can.  "You can take down the websites and
you can tell people not to put their pronouns in their emails, but
that doesn't mean they're not going to use the right pronouns for
their colleagues," says Sarah Horst, a planetary scientist at Johns
Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland.  Others are feeling
alienated by the agency's actions. For the early-career scientist, the
uproar is a huge distraction from their work: "Can I be allowed to
focus on my science, please?"

       [My friend, early career scientists have much more to
       worry about under the Trump administration than 
       distraction caused by changes in DEI policies.]


MARCH


3/5/25: 

xFrom smd@listsrv2.nasaprs.com Wed Mar  5 11:06:25 2025
Date: Wed, 5 Mar 2025 11:05:13
From: smd@listsrv2.nasaprs.com
To: "'smd@listsrv2.nasaprs.com'" <smd@listsrv2.nasaprs.com>
Subject: [Smd] SMD Research Programs Update

SMD Research Programs Update

Esteemed Colleagues,

As you may be aware, the new Administration has issued Executive Orders (EOs)
and implemented policy and guidance that may affect grants, cooperative
agreements, and contracts. SMD, consistent with agency direction, is working
diligently to comply with the requirements of the new policy and guidance, as
well as court orders resulting from litigation related to EOs and guidance. SMD
currently oversees approximately 6,000 grants, cooperative agreements,
contracts, interagency transfers, and internal NASA transfers; thus, as you can
imagine, the process of implementing the new policy and guidance is taking some
time and the turnaround time on actions will be longer than normal. We ask for
your patience. Please also realize that we are in a highly dynamic environment
with multiple lawsuits being adjudicated each with the potential to impact
policy and guidance affecting grants, cooperative agreements, and contracts.


SMD would like to provide the following brief updates:

1.    Unfortunately, Research Opportunities in Space and Earth Science (ROSES)
2025 was not released on Valentine’s Day as it has been in past years. There are
multiple reasons for this related to the increased workload on the SMD R&A Lead
as well as everyone who works with Notices of Funding Opportunities. SMD is
working diligently on ROSES-2025 and hope to release it soon.

2.    The Grants and Cooperative Agreement Manual (GCAM) is being revised to
ensure compliance with new Executive Orders, policy, and guidance. We hope to
have the revised GCAM released soon.

3.    The proposal creation function for the Topical Workshops, Symposiums, and
Conferences (TWSC-2024) in Space and Earth Sciences and Technology solicitation,
NNH24ZDA002N, is disabled on the NASA Solicitation and Proposal Integrated
Review and Evaluation System (NSPIRES). Previously submitted proposals will
still be reviewed and selection decisions will be made. This pause in accepting
new proposals is needed to update the TWSC solicitation to be compliant with
Executive Orders as well as to adapt it to the recent revision of the “Uniform
Guidance” (2 CFR 200) that governs all grants and cooperative agreements. The
timeframe for when TWSC will be revised/replaced and open for new proposals
cannot be predicted at this time. For more about TWSC
visit: https://science.nasa.gov/researchers/funding-for-events/.

4.    Some websites that NASA hosts and supports may have been taken offline so
that NASA can ensure the sites meet the policy and guidance of the new
Administration. We hope to have the websites, with any appropriate
modifications, back online as soon as possible.

5.    In late January, NASA senior leadership decided to postpone the upcoming
meeting of the NASA Advisory Committee (NAC), which had been scheduled for early
February. As the Science Committee reports to the NAC, SMD chose to mirror the
direction to the NAC and pause the work of the Science Committee. For
consistency and given that the chairs of the six independent division-level
advisory committees (DACs) serve on the Science Committee, this pause applies to
the DACs as well.


3/7/25: Ars Technica.Taking the Science out of NASA / White House may
   seek to slash NASA’s science budget by 50 percent "It would be
   nothing short of an extinction-level event for space science."

Eric Berger 

Although the Trump administration will not publicly release its budget
request for at least a few more weeks, senior agency officials are
starting to be briefed on the president's priorities.

This includes NASA. As expected, the president's plan for the space
agency includes some significant shakeups, including a desire to move
elements of NASA headquarters to field centers around the country.
However, in perhaps the most drastic change, the White House seeks to
massively cut funding for science programs at the space agency.

Multiple people familiar with the White House proposal said cuts to
NASA's "Science Mission Directorate" could be as high as 50 percent.
These sources emphasized that no decisions are final, and there are some
scenarios in which the cuts to NASA's science programs would be less.
BUT THE INTENT IS TO SLASH SCIENCE.

The associate administrator who runs NASA's Science Mission
Directorate, Nicola Fox, appeared in Houston on Thursday for a news
conference about a lunar landing.  Afterward, Ars asked her about the
implications of cutting science funding in half.

"We haven't had any information yet about the budget, and I hate
planning something on rumors and speculation," Fox said. "You know, we
will continue to do great science. We'll continue to have a balanced
science portfolio, for sure. And you know, we'll be grateful for what we
get, and we'll do great stuff with it."

    An “extinction-level” event

However, as word of these potential cuts spread through the scientific
community this week, they have set off alarm bells and generated a
response that indicated otherwise.

"If this is implemented, it would be nothing short of an
extinction-level event for space science and exploration in the United
States," said Casey Dreier, chief of space policy for The Planetary
Society. "Losing this much money, this fast, has no precedence in
NASA's history. It would force terrible decisions, including turning
off scores of active, productive, irreplaceable missions, halting
nearly all new mission development, and decimating the country's space
science workforce."

In many ways, NASA's science directorate is the crown jewel of the space
agency. Nearly all of the most significant achievements over the last 25
years have been delivered by the science programs: /Ingenuity/ flying on
Mars, New Horizons swooping by Pluto, images from the James Webb Space
Telescope, the discovery of thousands of exoplanets, the return of
samples from asteroids and comets, Cassini's discovery of water plumes
on Enceladus, a continuous robotic presence on Mars, and so much more.
Even the recent lunar landings by Firefly and Intuitive Machines were
funded by NASA's science directorate.

Of NASA's roughly $25 billion budget, however, only about 30 percent
is allocated to science. For fiscal year 2024, this amounted to $7.4
billion. This spending was broken down into approximately $2.7 billion
for planetary science, $2.2 billion for Earth science, $1.5 billion
for astrophysics, and $800 million for heliophysics.

<https://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/nasa-science-funding-since-1980-1.png>
NASA science funding since 1980.  Credit: Casey Dreier/The Planetary
Society NASA science funding since 1980. Credit: Casey Dreier/The
Planetary Society

The proposed cuts are being driven by Russell Vought, the recently
confirmed director of the White House Office of Management and Budget,
which sets budget and policy priorities for a presidential
administration. In some sense, the budgetary decisions should not come
as a surprise, as they are consistent with what Vought proposed in a
"shadow" budget for fiscal-year 2023 as part of his Center for
Renewing America.

"The budget also proposes a 50 percent reduction in NASA Science
programs and spending, reducing their misguided Carbon Reduction System
spending and Global Climate Change programs," Vought's organization
wrote in its report published in December 2022.

    Zeroing out Earth science?

Despite Vought's desire, however, NASA is expressly charged with
studying our planet.

The congressional act that created NASA in 1958 calls for the space
agency to expand human knowledge about Earth's atmosphere and space,
and the agency's Earth observation satellites have substantially
increased our understanding of this planet's weather, changing
climate, and land use.

Even if NASA's Earth science budget were taken to zero, cutting the
overall science budget in half would still dramatically reduce funding
in planetary science as well as other research areas. Scientists told
Ars that NASA would be forced to make difficult decisions, likely
including shutting off extended missions such as the Voyager and
Curiosity probes on Mars, and possibly even the Hubble Space Telescope.
It might be possible to save missions in later stages of development,
such as the Dragonfly probe to Saturn's moon Titan, and the NEO Surveyor
mission to search for hazardous asteroids. But it would be impossible to
start meaningful new missions to explore the Solar System, potentially
setting back planetary exploration a decade.

The cuts also seem at odds with the administration's stated goal of
commercializing space, that is, allowing the agency to buy more services
where they are available from the private sector. Instead, the heaviest
cuts—sources said that NASA may face an approximately 25 percent budget
cut, overall—would fall on the agency directorate, Science, least able
to buy commercial services.

"There are no commercial or private options for exploratory space
science," Dreier said. "No private individuals or companies are
currently able or willing to independently pursue boundary-pushing,
breakthrough science missions like Europa Clipper, James Webb Space
Telescope, or the Parker Solar Probe. This is a unique capability and
responsibility of our public space agency. There is no private space
science sector of our economy waiting to fill the gap."

Such a budget, scientists fear, would cede the future of exploration
in our Solar System to China, which last year revealed a long-term
exploration plan to compete with and potentially surpass its
competitors, including NASA and the United States.

The president's proposal for NASA's budget is just a starting point for
negotiations with Congress, of course. The president establishes budget
priorities, but Congress actually sets funding levels and authorizes
spending. However, to date, the US Congress has shown little appetite to
oppose President Trump's policy priorities. Moreover, a lot of NASA's
key science centers are located in Democratic-leaning states such as
California, Maryland, and New York, which do not have a lot of power in
the current Congress.

Comments...

I know we're not supposed to be hopeful for harm to impact others in
this comment section, but damned if I don't wake up each morning, flip
open the news feed, hoping upon hope, for a successful assassination
or a highly negative medical outcome to have occurred.  And I curse
how that jackass managed to MISS last summer :(  Its a real shame that
there aren't people in the USSS who are thinking "wonder if we could
'accidentally' miss something going on" But of course, the probability
that the staff of the US Secret Service are anything other than 'full
MAGA' is vanishingly small :( So: lets see; with the budget cuts we
lose:

    ongoing monitoring of the Voyager data stream
    probably lose New Horizons monitoring
    the upcoming Venus mission
    Dragonfly's trip to Saturn and what should have been amazing
       science FLYING AROUND A MOON
    will there even be enough money left to listen to the hardware already on Mars?
    oh yeah, and good bye to Mars Sample return.

NASA’s Earth Science I think often gets overlooked in the public eye,
but it’s really worth noting what’s at practical stake here. In many
ways (not to diminish the space / planetary side of their work), the
Earth Science is how most people are helped by and interact with
NASA's work, even if they don't realize it. To note just a few things
they do in the climate space:

  o develop one of only three latest-generation “reanalysis” products,
  that give a best guess of the weather and state of the atmosphere at
  every point on and above earth (MERRA2), which apart from being
  priceless for climate research is used to drive weather (incl fire
  weather) forecasts and is crucial for training future AI-driven
  models
   
  o develop one of the world’s top global climate models (GISS Model E)
   
  o do a lot of crucial applied climate science work on projecting
  climate impacts, both at home and abroad, with some of the world’s
  leading experts on humid heat, agricultural modeling, sea level
  rise, etc.. This stuff directly informs US climate adaptation policy
  (such as through the New York City Panel on Climate Change, which
  has many NASA GISS staff among its authors).
   
  o Run one of the country's most prestigious Earth Sciences postdoc
  fellowship programs, helping train the next generation of
  scientists.

  (In addition to the Greenbelt campus, a lot of this happens in their
  New York GISS office, hidden above the diner from Seinfeld, and is
  done at NASA because of the synergy between their Earth observation
  networks, computing resources, and scientific prowess)
 

Make America great again by ceding leadership in everything except
wealth inequality


My dad worked as a Nasa contractor for decades, we lived on the space
coast and got to see many launches from about as close as you could
safely and legally be. From what he said, by and large most of the men
working out there (and back then at least, it was mostly men) were
quite right wing. He said he caught all kinds of shit constantly as he
was quite moderate politically. It would be ironic if this puts a
bunch of Trump-voting engineer types out of work. Not to worry, they'd
find a way to blame illegals and woke liberals with a little
logic-bending.
 

Remember, this is all in service of eventually getting enormous tax
breaks passed to benefit the billionaires. There is a little bit of
trump's unbridled hatred for all things government thrown in as
seasoning, but it's all about dismantling our system of
self-governance and passing all (ALL) of the leftovers up the economic
ladder.  A wholesale, blatant, brazen, in-your-face looting.


If this disruption is pulled through unmitigated, NASAs lead in space
will be lost to China.  It has been decades of tenacious work on
probes, rovers, technologies, infrastructure that forged countless
well oiled teams with experienced seniors and established the right
culture.  Fire them and ALL that is lost!  It will be way more than a
decade imho to rebuild competence doing this stuff. Ask Boeing!


3/12/25: NASA SMD.  Subject: [Smd] Update to NASA Science Advisory
Committees

Update to NASA Science Advisory Committees

On February 19, 2025, the President issued Executive Order
14217, Commencing the Reduction of the Federal Bureaucracy, which sets
forth the Administration’s policy of reducing the size of the Federal
government in order to minimize waste and abuse, reduce inflation and
promote American freedom and innovation. This Executive Order directed
the termination of several Federal advisory committees across the
government and ordered the identification of additional unnecessary
Federal advisory committees for termination.

NASA maintains an advisory committee for each of the five science
divisions within the Science Mission Directorate: Astrophysics,
Biological and Physical Sciences, Earth Science, Heliophysics, and
Planetary Science. These committees, which are discretionary and not
required by statute, have supported NASA’s achievement of its science
goals. 

In response to Executive Order 14217, NASA’s acting administrator,
Janet Petro, has directed NASA to merge these five committees into a
single advisory committee with broad representation from across the
NASA science community. This restructuring will provide the
opportunity to retain one non-statutory science committee and ensure
continued support of NASA science goals -- improving efficiency, while
ensuring NASA maintains the important process of engaging with the
science community. 

NASA’s Science Mission Directorate is in the process of determining
the best structure, scale, and scope for the merged committee. The
directorate is committed to ensuring representation from all areas of
expertise relevant to the Science Mission Directorate’s objectives. 

The Science Mission Directorate is committed to continuing to engage
with the science community in a variety of ways -- both formal and
informal.


3/13/25: NASA Watch:  The New NASA Is Emerging

Keith's note: According to sources there is a "plan" under
formulation to remove nearly all NASA Headquarters functions and move
them to various NASA field centers. There will be little left in
Washington, DC. Oversight will now be distributed -- not
centralized. Human Spaceflight (SOMD) will reside at NASA JSC (where
it already is for the most part). ESDMD (exploration) stuff will be
split between JSC, KSC, and MSFC (again, not much change). Science
Mission Directorate (SMD) responsibilities will eventually go to
GSFC. Armstrong would get Aeronautics programs and Technology
development would be sent to LaRC. NASA Ames and Glenn will see some
shrinkage and a possible effort to be closed (their real estate is
valuable). Meanwhile JPL is a big TBD. Stay tuned. Things keep
changing.

Comments...

Neil.Verea
March 13, 2025 at 12:43 pm      

The distribution sounds reasonable on paper, question is will the HQs
people occupying the various positions in the MDs be willing to leave
DC? SMD to GSFC seems the least disruptive as many already live in
Maryland (not so good for those living in VA and DC). SOMD, moving to
Houston may not be all that appealing from a quality of life
perspective (think oppressive summer heat April-October) although many
came from Houston, have tasted the Good Life of DC and may not want to
trade down. STMD move to LaRC is a natural move to its roots from a
previous era, but again giving up the DC lifestyle, taking a paycut to
move to Newport News -- really? Aeronautics move to Armstrong is the
least reasonable, Aero seems more aligned with LaRC and GRC than
Armstrong in sheer numbers, not to mention 50+ year olds and their
spouses taking a pay cut, moving from the DMV to Palmdale, Lancaster,
Mojave or Tehachapi --  Yikes not that Newport News or Cleveland
would be any better. So a lot of slots would be open and filled by
local unqualified, but eager warm bodies, so how would that be more
efficient? 

     Implementing any of these moves (exception SMD to GSFC) would be
     disruptive beyond measure and would be years (certainly beyond
     this Administrations 4 years) before stability is restored if
     ever. But on paper it looks like a reasonable plan. Here is an
     idea, in the tradition of consistency move the administrative
     offices to Stenis, which already has several Agency
     administrative functions, including the head administrator, the
     NASA Administrator.

Ever been to Lancaster? Cleveland (GRC is technically in Brook Park)
has 3 major league sports franchises (yes the Browns still qualify as
a pro franchise), arguably the best orchestra in the world, a major
art museum, one of the largest theater complexes in the nation, within
driving distance of a national park, and sits on one of the worlds
largest bodies of fresh water. Hardly a desert.

Laughed at the Newport News comment -- that's why many of us live in
the Historic Triangle (Yorktown, Jamestown, Williamsburg) -- very
pleasant living. If you are OK not having the need for big city life.

I'd disagree with the AFRC vs LaRC statement. LaRC has many things
it does. AFRC is all aero with the exception of one small program out
of STMD. The entire valley is built on aerospace, and there is
significantly more opportunity for actually flying things year round,
not to mention the flight ops experience. You can do all Aero at AFRC,
while being significantly more limited with flight testing out of
LaRC. The real argument imo is that you are 100% correct that no one
wants to live in the Antelope Valley, especially if their used to
things like water, or the color green<A6>

Hearing reports that the Issacman people want to move the shriveled
remains of HQ to S. Arlington.

I'm sure Ames' real estate is valuable, but not sure how valuable a
couple hundred acres containing lots of hazardous materials next to
the airport in Cleveland is.

Ames has a big underground plume too.

That real estate sits across the airport from the proposed new indoor
stadium for the Browns. I would not be surprised if local politicians
are being dazzled with all sorts of development if only they let GRC
be shutdown. Reminds me of how GRC<F9>s largest rocket engine test
facility was shutdown to extend a runway at Hopkins for international
flights. The result? GRC missed out on all the commercial rocket
engine development of the past two decades and unless you are going to
Dublin you are not getting an international flight out of Hopkins.  I
wonder with the gutting of the EPA whether environmental concerns will
still be such an impediment to development.

Google will probably buy up the rest of Ames. Probably other tech
companies as well.

They just sold a long-empty lot right next to GRC for about $65k/acre.
The GRC main campus is something like 350 acres, so at the same price,
that<F9>s $23M max, if you sold off the whole thing. It<F9>d probably
go for less if you factor in the cost of any remediation & demolition
of old buildings.  To put that in perspective, ONE SEAT on one Crew
Dragon flight is something like $55M <F3> $88M.  Selling off ALL of
GRC wouldn<F9>t buy half of one astronaut<F9>s seat on the world<F9>s
cheapest ride to space.  Glenn<F9>s ATF has a lot more empty real
estate, though so maybe they<F9>re thinking about selling that. 6000+
acres, but the price per acre would be less.


3/16/25: substack.com. Amiko Kelly.  The Only Thing Abandoned is the
  Truth / Preserving NASA’s Legacy Amidst a Vortex of Misinformation

As a little girl in rural Texas, I used to slip out of my house before
bed, lying on the still-warm driveway in my thrifted hand-me-down silky
blue nightgown, staring up at the stars. I chased them—not with rockets
or telescopes, but with dreams, curiosity, and the quiet hope that
someday I’d break free from my small world and reach for something greater.

I know what it means to dream beyond your circumstances. We were seven
kids, poor, and poorer after my parents’ divorce. Stability was never a
given. At 15, I was alone—my first home wasn’t an apartment or shelter
but a treehouse. Really, just a wooden platform in an old oak, no roof,
just sky, hidden in the woods where we once played. Railings like a top
bunk with only the earth below.

But even in those moments when survival was my biggest concern, I never
stopped thinking about the stars. I never stopped dreaming of space, of
finding my way into a future beyond the life I’d been handed. That dream
carried me through, driving me to carve out a path to NASA, to a future
that once felt impossible.

That’s why it’s so painful to see people tearing NASA down now,
dismissing it, mocking it, and twisting reality to fit a narrative that
serves only those who created the lies. I’ve seen friends and even
family members call NASA “shameful,” using clown emojis to describe
decisions they’ve been misinformed about and claiming that NASA
employees are only now being “held accountable” for long-standing
practices, like providing weekly activity reports. These comments
overlook the reality of what NASA represents.

I know what it stands for. I see what it inspires.

Working for NASA wasn’t just a dream—it was a calling. I worked hard to
get my foot in the door and even harder once there. Like many who have
devoted their lives to space exploration, I’ve watched with heartbreak
as misinformation chips away at the trust and admiration NASA earned.

NASA was once among the most respected government agencies, symbolizing
human achievement and possibility. But today, conspiracy theories,
climate denial, and political distortions diminish decades of
groundbreaking work.

And now, it’s not just bad faith attacks—budget cuts wielded like Elon
Musk’s chainsaw, hacking away at vital offices such as Technology,
Policy and Strategy, even the Chief Scientist, which helps monitor the
climate*—*at a time when science is more crucial than ever. A fact made
even more apparent when politicians like Marjorie Taylor Greene absurdly
claim Democrats control the weather.

These cuts aren’t about efficiency.

    NASA operates on a fraction of a penny per tax dollar, yet Musk and
    his DOGE team, with Trump’s backing, are driving this destruction.
    Trump has granted him near free rein, thanks to the hundreds of
    millions he poured into buying the presidency. This detriment is the
    price we pay for letting the wealthy dictate our future.

Ironically, many of Musk’s supporters—people far from wealthy—ignorantly
support his agenda, serving his interests while he disregards their
struggles. In addition to the irony, they disregard that Musk received
$35 billion in government aid to fund Tesla and SpaceX.

Meanwhile, Musk’s expanding influence in space exploration and oversight
of employees raises serious concerns about conflicts of interest as his
private companies profit from the programs he has slashed.

Trump and Musk also chopped NASA’s Office of Diversity and Equal
Opportunity, undermining fairness in hiring and fostering
discrimination. America needs employees from all walks of life and
diversity of thought. Diversity makes us stronger.

Despite their supposed championing of free speech, this destructive duo
is also policing language and personal pronouns, requiring NASA to scrub
mentions of ‘environmental justice,’ ‘Indigenous people,’ and ‘women in
leadership.’ Even NASA’s tagline—“Through Artemis, NASA aims to land the
first woman and first person of color on the Moon”—has been erased.
They’ve also removed profiles from the website that shared inspiring
stories of employees connected to diversity, further eroding representation.

        *The Astronauts Weren’t Abandoned. The Truth Was.*

Recently, I’ve been following and correcting misinformation spreading
like wildfire about NASA supposedly abandoning astronauts in space. The
story went viral—fueled by people eager to believe the worst. Reality
check: the astronauts—our friends—weren’t stranded. NASA never forgot
them. As always, the agency prioritized their safety and well-being.

For example, Astronaut Frank Rubio’s mission was originally planned for
under six months but was extended to 371 days due to mission
requirements, breaking the record for the longest single spaceflight by
an American. But this extension followed standard NASA protocol, focused
solely on mission needs and crew safety, without fanfare or controversy.

Where were the MAGA salty tears then?

And it’s not just this one story—misinformation distorts even the most
routine NASA operations. Take the recent launch of the Crew-10 mission
on Friday. I’ve seen people, including the media, falsely call it a
“rescue mission” by SpaceX for the astronauts already on the space
station when it was a standard crew rotation, just like NASA has done
for decades. The astronauts on the station are not stranded. They have a
fully functional spacecraft—which has been there since September—to
bring them home, just as every crew before them has had.

Yet, just two days before the launch, when NASA decided to scrub the
Crew-10 mission due to an issue with the rocket’s ground support
equipment—prioritizing safety as it always has—people called it
“shameful.” It’s as if ensuring the safety of astronauts is seen as a
failure—that delaying a launch for a technical issue is a sign of
weakness rather than part of the process that has made spaceflight safer.

This mindset didn’t emerge out of nowhere. In a political climate where
bravado is mistaken for strength and where Trump has fueled the belief
that leadership means never backing down—even when caution is
necessary—people are now applying that mentality to spaceflight.

But here’s the truth: real strength isn’t reckless. It’s knowing when to
wait, when to reassess, and when to prioritize human lives over optics.

Yet repeatedly, we see the same pattern—a refusal to engage in critical
thinking, a rush to mock and tear down rather than take the time to
learn. This behavior isn’t just misinformation; it’s an active effort to
sabotage exploration, scientific progress, and trust.


        *The People Who Once Admired NASA Now Tear It Down*

What’s even more disappointing is seeing people I once considered
friends — people who used to be inspired by space exploration—buy into
these lies and spread them without a second thought.

One of these former friends and his wife—a teacher—who once admired my
husband’s mission, joined in. His wife had even asked if her elementary
students could send letters to my husband after his nearly yearlong
mission in space. Those kids looked at him with admiration, inspired by
the idea of someone living among the stars.

Yet, they have both fallen into this mindset, fueling the narrative and
dismissing what he, and so many others, worked hard to achieve.

What happened? When did curiosity and respect turn into cynicism and
contempt?


        *Without NASA, Private Space Wouldn’t Exist*

People say, “We don’t need NASA anymore. SpaceX is the real space
program,” followed by a rocket and strong-arm emoji. However, SpaceX and
other private space companies wouldn’t even be part of the conversation
without NASA.

NASA laid the foundation, building the technology, infrastructure, and
expertise that private companies now rely on. The commercial space
industry exists because NASA invested in it, partnering with companies
to develop new spacecraft, train astronauts, and provide launch
facilities. SpaceX didn’t send astronauts to the International Space
Station alone—it did so through a NASA contract, using NASA-trained
astronauts under its oversight.

This endeavor isn’t a competition. NASA and private space companies work
together, pushing the boundaries of exploration in ways that neither
could do alone. However, to act as if NASA is now obsolete means to
erase the decades of work that made private spaceflight possible in the
first place.

And let’s be honest: Sustainable space exploration—not just the Apollo
days of several necessary test flights to and around the moon—needs
funding and is now a global endeavor where we share expertise and, yes,
financing with our international partners. Trump and Musk’s ‘American
first, go-alone’ isolation can undercut our long-term space exploration
goals for humanity's benefit.

SpaceX alone is not going to fulfill that complex and costly role—Musk
needs NASA more than NASA needs Musk. Is that why he’s trying to
decimate it? A deflated NASA will make it vulnerable for exploitation.
Next, Trump and Musk will be on the SpaceX launch pad doing another
advertisement to prop up Musk’s oligarchy.


        *NASA’s Legacy is Everywhere—Even If You Don’t See It*

To claim NASA has given us “nothing” is to betray the reality of how
much this agency has shaped our world. The technology that fuels our
daily lives—GPS, medical advancements, earth observation, weather
forecasting, and even improvements in water purification—exists because
of NASA’s innovation. The research conducted for spaceflight has led to
better heart monitors, safer aircraft, and life-saving medical
treatments. Even the phone in your pocket has components developed
thanks to space technology.

I know this personally. While in NASA’s Technology Transfer &
Commercialization Office, I witnessed firsthand how the agency’s work
translated into real-world benefits. The cutting-edge research and
technological advancements didn’t just stay in space—they directly
improved lives here on Earth. These innovations weren’t abstract ideas;
they brought tangible changes to everything from health care to consumer
technology.

NASA belongs to all of us. Its discoveries through telescopes and
robotic probes**expand our understanding of the universe, drive
technological innovation, and inspire the next generation to chase the
stars, just like I once did.

With Trump and Musk planning to slash NASA’s budget further and
implement a second wave of mass layoffs, they and their MAGA brethren
used dehumanizing language to describe civil servants, words like
“traumatize them,’ ‘they’re grifters,’ and as Marjorie Taylor Green
said, ‘they don’t deserve their paychecks.’

Dictators use this tactic to get the public to accept the atrocities
they’re about to commit.

But low-information citizens, as Trump once called as he professed his
love for “the poorly educated,” are ignorant of what federal employees do.

“That’s why he’s willing to take a chainsaw to people’s jobs, Medicare,
social security, and Medicaid,” a union president said in response to a
now-deleted X repost by Musk: “Stalin, Mao, and Hitler didn’t murder
millions of people. Public sector employees did.” With Musk openly
defending murderous, genocidal thugs and blaming civil servants of all
people, it’s safe to say we’ve resolved the question about Musk’s
infamous ‘salute.’

And for what? Musk has no proof and is unclear about how much he’s truly
saving the government from ‘waste, fraud, and abuse.’ When government
employees leave—voluntarily or not—they’ll still rely on unemployment or
Social Security if they can’t find private sector jobs. The so-called
‘savings’ will fund defense spending and tax cuts for the rich while
regular people lose access to essential services. That’s not a trade-off
any taxpayer should accept. Trump’s lying about this, and MAGA either
isn’t listening or is completely brainwashed—they keep voting against
their own best interests.

Before the bill passed on Friday, which would give Trump and Musk even
more power to dismantle the government, agencies were already being
forced to submit plans to slash their budgets in preparation for a
second wave of mass layoffs.

    Soon, the NASA we knew—the agency that received bipartisan support,
    was consistently voted the best place to work in the federal
    government, and was recognized and revered by the public—will be a
    gutted memory of a glorious time of achievement which existed to
    “focus on peaceful applications of space science and technology.”

But suppose we allow misinformation and politically motivated
destruction to take root. In that case, we’re not just jeopardizing
NASA’s future—we’re eroding the spirit of exploration, innovation, and
hope that makes us human.

When we lose faith in NASA, we lose belief in what we can achieve
together, in the boundless possibilities that come from daring to dream,
reaching for the unknown, or even Mars—not as a corporate cash grab or a
personal monument, but as a shared human endeavor.

Unlike Trump and Musk, whose dreams are only as big as their
self-importance and the size of their bank accounts, NASA’s vision is
about us striving together toward something more significant.

Hint: it’s not ego.


3/15/25: NYT.  Editorial.  THE AUTHORITARIAN ENDGAME ON HIGHER
EDUCATION

[full article captured in another file]

When a political leader wants to move a democracy toward a more
authoritarian form of government, he often sets out to undermine
independent sources of information and accountability. The leader tries
to delegitimize judges, sideline autonomous government agencies and
muzzle the media. President Vladimir Putin of Russia has done so over
the past quarter-century. To lesser degrees, Prime Minister Viktor Orban
of Hungary, Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India and President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey recently have as well.

The weakening of higher education tends to be an important part of this
strategy. Academic researchers are supposed to pursue the truth, and
budding autocrats recognize that empirical truth can present a threat to
their authority. “Wars are won by teachers,” Mr. Putin has said. He and
Mr. Erdogan have closed universities. Mr. Modi’s government has arrested
dissident scholars, and Mr. Orban has appointed loyal foundations to run
universities.

President Trump has not yet gone as far to impede democracy as these
other leaders, but it would be naïve to ignore his early moves to
mimic their approach. He has fired government watchdogs, military
leaders, prosecutors and national security experts. He has sued media
organizations, and his administration has threatened to regulate
others. He has suggested that judges are powerless to check his
authority, writing on social media, “He who saves his Country does not
violate any Law.”

Mr. Trump’s multifaceted campaign against higher education is core to
this effort to weaken institutions that do not parrot his version of
reality. Above all, he is enacting or considering major cuts to
universities’ resources. The Trump administration has announced sharp
reductions in the federal payments that cover the overhead costs of
scientific research, such as laboratory rent, electricity and
hazardous waste disposal. (A federal judge has issued a temporary
restraining order against those cuts.) Vice President JD Vance and
other Republicans have urged a steep increase of a university
endowment tax that Mr. Trump signed during his first term. Together,
these two policies could reduce the annual budgets at some research
universities by more than 10 percent.

Mr. Trump is squeezing higher education in other ways too. The
Education Department let go of about half its work force, potentially
making it harder for students to receive financial aid. The virtual
elimination of the U.S. Agency for International Development led to
the cancellation of $800 million in grants to Johns Hopkins alone. On
March 7, the administration targeted a single university, announcing
that it would end $400 million in grants to Columbia as punishment for
its insufficient response to campus antisemitism.

*We understand why* many Americans don’t trust higher education and
feel they have little stake in it. Elite universities can come off as
privileged playgrounds for young people seeking advantages only for
themselves. Less elite schools, including community colleges, often
have high dropout rates leaving their students with the onerous
combination of debt and no degree. Throughout higher education,
faculty members can seem out of touch, with political views that skew
far to the left.

Mr. Trump and his advisers are tapping into public dissatisfaction with
real problems at universities. But as is the case with their approach to
trade, government waste, immigration policy and European military
spending, many of their would-be solutions will not solve the underlying
problems or will create new ones. The American higher education system,
for all its flaws, is the envy of the world, and it now faces a
financial squeeze that threatens its many strengths — strengths that
benefit all Americans.

Chief among them is its global leadership in medical care and
scientific research. American professors still dominate the Nobel
Prizes. When wealthy and powerful people in other countries face a
medical crisis, they often use their connections to get an appointment
at an American academic hospital. For that matter, some of the same
Republicans targeting universities with budget cuts seek out its top
medical specialists when they or their relatives are ill.

American leadership in medical and scientific research depends on
federal money. Private companies, even large ones, typically do not
conduct much of the basic research that leads to breakthroughs because
it is too uncertain; even successful experiments may not lead to
profitable products for decades. Mr. Trump’s planned funding cuts are
large enough to force universities to do less of this research. The
list of potential forgone progress is long, including against cancer,
heart disease, viruses, obesity, dementia and drug overdoses. And
there will be costs beyond the medical sector. There is a reason that
Silicon Valley sprang up next to a research university.

The nonfinancial parts of the administration’s campaign against higher
education are also alarming. Last weekend, immigration officers
arrested Mahmoud Khalil, a leader of pro-Palestinian demonstrations at
Columbia who holds a green card and is married to an American
citizen. The government has offered no evidence that he broke the
law. Even many legal scholars who reject his views on Israel and Hamas
consider his arrest to be a dangerous violation of free speech
principles, and we share this concern. Mr. Trump described
Mr. Khalil’s detention as “the first arrest of many to come,” a sign
that the president wants to chill speech among the many immigrants on
university campuses.

*What is the most* effective response to Mr. Trump’s campaign against
universities? For people outside higher education, this is a moment to
speak publicly about why universities matter. They promote public
health, economic growth and national security. They are the largest
employers in some regions. They are an unmatched, if imperfect, engine
of upward mobility that can alter the trajectory of entire families.

For people in higher education, this is a moment both to be bolder
about trumpeting its strengths and to be more reflective about
addressing its weaknesses. About those shortcomings: Too many
professors and university administrators acted in recent years as
liberal ideologues rather than seekers of empirical truth. Academics
have tried to silence debate on legitimate questions, including about
Covid lockdowns, gender transition treatments, and diversity, equity
and inclusion. A Harvard University survey last year found that only
33 percent of graduating seniors felt comfortable expressing their
opinions about controversial topics, with moderate and conservative
students being the most worried about ostracization.

“The insularity of American academia is appalling,” said Michael Roth,
the president of Wesleyan University. “It has led to massive resentment
against intellectual elites.” This insularity does not justify Mr.
Trump’s policies, but it does help explain the dearth of conservatives
defending universities today. Universities will be in a stronger
long-term position if they recommit themselves to open debate.

As for trumpeting the sector’s strengths, the leaders of American
higher education have been largely timid and quiet in the face of the
Trump onslaught. “The people who are attacking higher education are
talking nonstop,” said Holden Thorp, a chemist and former university
administrator who runs the Science family of journals. “And the people
leading higher education are not saying very much.” (Mr.  Roth, a
frequent critic of the administration, is an exception.)  University
presidents seem to be hoping that if they keep their heads down, the
threat will pass — or at least pass by their campus. They are unlikely
to be so fortunate.

In Mr. Trump’s first term, administrators and professors sometimes
made the opposite mistake and commented on political issues about
which they had little expertise. College presidents do not need to
become pundits. But they do need to defend the core mission of their
institutions when it is under attack. University leaders would help
themselves, and the country, by emerging from their defensive crouches
and making a forthright case for inquiry, research, science and
knowledge.

Comments 1466...

Authoritarians do not want an educated population.  trump is on his
way to being one, with the blessings of his party and the courts.
Restricting education and thought is one of the first steps.

Intellectuals were a targeted sector in "purges" by Stalin's USSR and
Communist China.  Anti-intellectualism is a hallmark of authoritarian
governments and the Trump Adminstration following suit.  Case in
point, US Attorney for D.C. Ed Martin told (private/Jesuit) Georgetown
University if it doesn't elininate D.E.I. initiatives then he won't
hire any graduates.  Imagine conservative uproar if the US Attorney
for Virigina told (private/Christian) Liberty University it would not
hire graduates until it stopped teaching Young Creationism.
How ironic that Republicans used to champion state's rights and
individual freedoms while condemning federalism but now that they hold
the reins of power, they're fine with federal tyranny.

"Restricting education and thought is one of the first steps" in
authoritarian rule?  Then why are the Democrats so opposed to school
choice when so many children are being poorly served by the public
education system?  Btw, Columbia University annually receives $2
billion from the US government, being us taxpayers.  I think Columbia,
and their ability to educate their students, can get by on only $1.6
billion that they are now going to receive.

@mjbarr DEI is under attack because it has essentially all of the
problems of its fraternal twin, Affirmative Action:

- AA/DEI led to reverse discrimination against majority and some
  minority groups, creating unequal treatment and perpetuating
  discrimination.

- AA/DEI reinforced negative stereotypes and created resentment among
  those who did not receive favored treatment.

- AA/DEI created doubts about qualifications of those selected on
  racial or ethnic criteria rather than merit, leading to
  stigmatization.

- AA/DEI's lowered admission standards often meant admitting students
  who were unqualified and unable to meet academic and work
  performance standards, thus setting them up for failure.

- AA/DEI's focus on broad categories like race/ethnicity ignored
  diversity within groups, so privileged minority individuals often
  received preference while the truly disadvantaged were overlooked.

- AA/DEI addressed symptoms of inequality, not root causes; tackling
  underlying problems like inadequate education, economic disparities
  and social barriers is crucial.

- AA/DEI undermined meritocracy, with racial/ethnic characteristics
  outweighing individual achievements and qualifications. A society
  based on equal opportunities should prioritize merit to ensure fair
  competition.

- As Chief Justice Roberts said in the Supreme Court decision against
  AA, “Eliminating racial discrimination means eliminating all of it."
  This of course means eliminating racial preference in DEI, too.

As a university professor, now in Canada, I agree with many of the
points in this article. The attack on education is shocking and
concerning for the future of the country.  One reason I believe is not
discussed often enough that Americans are turning against the higher
education system is the cost. Tuition is skyrocketing and students are
entering weak job markets, leaving them saddled with debt well into
middle age. If we want to win back public support, we need to start
lowering tuition costs. Everyone should have access to education
without it burdening them.  Of course, none of the Trump policies give
universities enough room in their budgets to also lower tuition, so
perhaps it’s a moot point.

@Holly the reason that American universities, especially state
universities, cost so much now is because of Ronald Reagan. When he
was governor of California he decided that by making public higher
education affordable, states were creating a dangerous "educated
proletariat."  His education adviser Roger A. Freeman spoke to this at
a press conference in 1970:

   [cont] “We are in danger of producing an educated proletariat. …
    That’s dynamite! We have to be selective on who we allow [to go to
    college]. If not, we will have a large number of highly trained
    and unemployed people.”  Reagan began to cut back spending on
    state higher education in California. Other states over the years
    also cut back. Now only about 15% of state university budgets come
    from the state.  In the 1960s and most of the 1970s state
    universities were very affordable. Not any more. Once again, the
    blame falls on Republicans, who often ironically rail against how
    expensive higher education is.

Discussions of higher education overlook the fact that the bulk of our
higher education institutions are not elite Ivy League research
universities, but regional public universities.  Those students are
often balancing school with commuting to campus, multiple jobs, and
family responsibilities. Regional universities enable hard-working
students to become teachers, nurses, med techs, social worker,
physical therapists, and many other careers that are essential to our
society—and that provide a path to the middle class.
The Trump attacks will damage these schools that are already
underfunded and strained to the limit, and the damage will impact us
all—especially the opportunities available to children of working
families.

Universities need the humanities and social sciences as much as the
STEM fields. Otherwise, how are we to understand society's workings
and the organization of power? How else can we ever solve vast social
problems?  Professors with liberal views come by them honestly,
because their own research proves the existence and the source of
social inequalities and injustices.
It is good for researchers to teach their students methods of inquiry,
standards of proof for research findings, and to present their
students with their findings. If those findings lead to conclusions
about injustice, then instructors must go where the evidence
leads. This is not indoctrination, it's the essence of teaching.
Researchers and students with conservative views should be free to
express them. But after they express them, they must be prepared to
cite evidence to back them up.  All too often, when they try to do so,
the evidence they cite is rife with bias and shows their own
indoctrination.

As one of those supposedly "woke profs" blamed for triggering
authoritarian attacks on higher education, let me set the record
straight. After twenty years teaching at a public university, I've
observed two consistent truths: students genuinely value exposure to
diverse viewpoints, and conservatives often struggle academically not
because they're silenced, but because their arguments lack substance
and evidence.  The fields I teach — Africana studies, gender studies,
anthropology — weren't included in my first twelve years of
education. These disciplines exist because people fought for their
inclusion in academia. They are legitimate areas of inquiry that have
expanded our understanding of history, economics, and society.

    [cont]This fantasy of liberal professors "silencing debate" is a
    convenient fiction. Ask yourself: what exactly is conservatism
    today, beyond the MAGA death cult? It seeks to preserve
    comfortable ways of life and roots these desires in religious
    doctrine rather than historical evidence or factual
    analysis. They're making faith-based arguments in academic
    settings that demand empirical evidence or at least careful
    argumentation.  The Editorial Board and a fair number of
    commenters seem reluctant to confront an uncomfortable reality:
    sometimes one political position is simply better supported by
    evidence than another. That's not ideological bias —- it's good
    scholarship.​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​

@Andrew there are many generalizations here. It's hard to know where
to start. I'll just pick two. One, faculty really do not simply live
lives of thought and research. We teach, we support both our
universities organizations and our fields. And even when we are doing
what you call thought and research, it's not like there are not
objective goals we have to reach. It is rewarding work to be sure, but
not quite the pastoral fantasy you've set out here. Two, it's been
said that it's expensive to be poor, and that's true for universities
as well. Some years ago my state did a study of the drivers of
expenses at its state universities. One of them was the reduction of
state funding, which in turn created a whole apparatus of marketing
and philanthropic efforts to make up for the shortfalls. Squeezing
universities has not made them cheaper.

@Andrew I teach engineering in one of the universities. Nearly every
faculty in an university setting has a moderate income. That is not
what had been cut. Federal funding does not go to salary for
faculty. The cut is on financial support for high tech research and
that will affect the chances of making new breakthroughs. Reducing
research funding will affect American high tech industrial
competitiveness and healthcare in the long term. In anticipation of
these cuts, universities are already reducing the number of graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers that will be hired in
laboratories by as much as 30-50% this year. Chocking off the next
generation of engineers, researchers, and doctors will very
effectively knock off American from the top spot as a high tech
powerhouse.  Where are we going to find engineers to staff industrial
positions building new products of the future? Within a few years, I
can guarantee you that our global competitors will surpass us as they
redouble their support in higher education. Science, technology, and
medicine together form a close-knitted ecosystem. Destroying
university level research will have harm far beyond our campuses. As I
get close to retirement age, I have never imagine that America will
cease to be THE global technology leader in my lifetime, until
now. Self-inflicted wound is so sad.

Intellectuals were a targeted sector in "purges" by Stalin's USSR and
Communist China.  Anti-intellectualism is a hallmark of authoritarian
governments and the Trump Adminstration following suit.  Case in
point, US Attorney for D.C. Ed Martin told (private/Jesuit) Georgetown
University if it doesn't elininate D.E.I. initiatives then he won't
hire any graduates.  Imagine conservative uproar if the US Attorney
for Virigina told (private/Christian) Liberty University it would not
hire graduates until it stopped teaching Young Creationism.  How
ironic that Republicans used to champion state's rights and individual
freedoms while condemning federalism but now that they hold the reins
of power, they're fine with federal tyranny.

As a professor at a large public university in Ohio, I think daily
about looking for a job in another sector. Why? Because Trump and
DeWine - with the passage of SB 1 - have effectively deputized every
student who enters my classroom to decide that some word in my
syllabus is somehow diminishing their civil rights. In the age of cell
phones and social media, professors are vulnerable, every day, to the
whims of one disgruntled student - it is McCarthyism on steroids. I
didn’t become a professor so I could receive death threats for saying
the word gay.

    [cont] By encouraging private citizens to monitor faculty
    curriculum and create a culture of policing, Trump and DeWine are
    effectively at the bully pulpit, intimidating everyone. And of
    course, the not-so-cloaked white supremacy of it all is
    staggering. Trump’s “End DEI portal” encouraging parents to
    provide “details of concerning practices” for teaching concepts or
    using materials they find objectionable is not intended for Black
    or female or LGBTQ students to cite what they reject, but rather
    is directly targeted at being a McCarthy-esque catch-all for white
    grievance.  Encouraging private citizens to inform on others is a
    hallmark of all authoritarian regimes. And professors - our
    safety, our families - are in the direct line of fire. I’d like to
    think that, like my grandfather who was blacklisted, I am prepared
    to take the hit. But if I’m being honest, I’m not sure I am.

So the New York Times' editorial solution to ending the attacks on
higher education is for those of us in higher education to endorse
attacks on diversity, equity, and inclusion, public health measures,
and the rights of trans youth to obtain health care? That will make
the loudest, most powerful reactionary voices in America right now
feel that their opinions are supported enough?
No thank you, we'll pass.

What the commenters who are bashing the Ivies and similar universities
seem to forget is that for every "elitist left-wing " institution of
higher learning they find so objectionable, there is a Grand Canyon,
Liberty, High Point, California Baptist, etc. university dedicated to
indoctrinating their students in the far-right "conservative" values
they hold so dear.

Let's stop over analyzing this.  Trump is not normal.  This is all
about payback.  Save the criticisms for another time.  It is like
saying that the murderer had a point - the victim could be annoying at
times.  It doesn't matter right now.  Oppose Trump policy and actions
at every turn.

Of course the Trump administration wants to silence knowledge,
accusing universities of pushing agendas as he himself pushes his own
agenda.  A well informed citizenry--if we had one at this point--would
never have elected him, and he knows it.  Knowledge, inquiry, research
skills, and critical thinking are all serious threats to authoritarian
takeovers.  This man is throwing the baby out with the bathwater as he
seeks to accrue unlimited and permanent power by controlling
viewpoints, research and knowledge.  Great discoveries with benefits
to mankind do not occure in a vaccum, they need to be carefully
nurtured and given the freedom to produce great fruits.

I am a tenured professor in the humanities. People need to realize
that the recent cuts have decimated humanities programs at top
universities. We receive no funding from the NIH, but we have been
forced to cut our admissions in half. On top of this, the humanities
has been an enormous punching bad for at least a decade by now. We are
constantly told we are utterly useless and a complete waste of
time. We are caricatured as being a bunch of whining extremists by
people who don’t read books. Meanwhile, we see politicians and young
people utterly ignorant of history, geography, critical thinking,
reading and writing. We are not perfect but please stop beating us up
and insulting us.  When everyone is a bunch of mindless automatons
existing on TikTok and AI with no memory of anything over five months
old you will realize we have become utterly soulless as a
country. We’re almost there already. I do not know if the humanities
will survive this era.

Ever since the GOP started allying with the forces of Biblical
ignorance in the 1970's and 80's, the challenge for them has been how
to eliminate other educational avenues. In Florida this past decade,
Ron DeSantis has gamely attempted to seize control in the name of
"fairness" of formerly independent venues of higher education. One of
his acolytes, Pam Bondi, will show resentful right-wingers everywhere
how to attack perceived enemies while claiming to do so in the name of
justice.

Thanks ny times. But please also discuss and cover the vast majority
of institutions that don’t fit the caricature that you raise and
affirm with little evidence. For example, start by reporting on the
vast majority of faculty who pour their life and soul into the success
of their students (and generally not pushing a political agenda),
often foregoing more lucrative and less punishing careers outside of
academia.

I have been an academic researcher and administrator for more than 50
years. I’m still teaching part time and mentoring undergraduate
research at age 81.  I’ve advanced degrees from both public and
private institutions and have worked at both. I’m increasingly tired
and frustrated at being categorized as “elite.”  My personal middle
class upbringing engendered an aspiration to become educated, which I
actualized by spending almost a decade learning beyond high school. I,
and my wife who helped support me in the endeavor, voluntarily
sacrificed both time and money to pull that off. The result? A solid
middle class life style for us both, and a life and occupation for me
pursuing truth and ideas, while passing those opportunities forward to
the next generations. There are literally thousands of others who have
taken similar paths through and to non-exclusive institutions of
higher education. To call us “elite” is pejorative.  We simply worked
to identify and achieve long-term goals, which also demanded
commensurate responsibility.

This is a very balanced take. Like many people, I am ambivalent - on
the one hand, what Trump is doing is dangerous for all the obvious
reasons. Gutting medical research funding is obviously incredibly
destructive and attacking universities is in fact something that comes
from an authoritarian playbook. On the other hand, there is much that
is profoundly wrong with the universities, especially in the
humanities where the boundary between research and scholarship has
been blurred for a long time. So when I hear Trump giving a list of
demands to Columbia University, it is very unsettling.  At the same
time, when he attacks their Middle Eastern Studies Department, I can't
help but admitting that he has a point because much of what is done in
certain corners of the humanities is a little more than political
activism disguised by a thin layer of pseudointellectual jargon. So,
on the one hand you have politicians who want to remake higher
education in their own image; on the other hand, you have at least
parts of the universities that are themselves little more than
gathering places of activists with PhDs. A very difficult situation to
overcome.

I find it interesting that those Republicans tossing the most stones
at higher education all went to elite universities. It's time they
walk-the-walk. If higher education is so horrible, then let's hire
...high school dropouts to be judges and generals. Let's close the
military academies. Let's have the current leaders denounce their
education and schools. Go for it!

I find it hard to forgive my colleagues in academia who pushed DEI too
far, with the anonymous micro-aggression reporting hotlines,
unconscious bias workshops, trigger warnings and safe spaces etc. Many
of us warned that this would blow back in our faces politically, and
now it has happened. But as with everything, it’s just an excuse for
Trump, a pretext to destroy American civilization and turn us into a
monarchical oligarchy, like Russia.

** I work in academia and find the characterization of the faculty
especially to be so off-base. My guess is that few (but certainly not
zero) vote for Trump. But any fair assessment would judge that most
are in fact extremely centrist and eager to appear that way. Many are
dispositionally and culturally deeply conservative. They are not, by
and large, people with notably left-leaning politics. Far from it. That
is a caricature and a stereotype nurtured over years, not least in
these pages, where unfortunate and silly episodes involving loudmouths
became symbols of supposed dysfunction. Reporting and commentary on
campuses would be horribly dull if they actually covered the
day-to-day operations, which hew toward a stifling status quo and
institutionalism, and most certainly not a radical activism.

I agree that ideological conformity is a serious problem in both the
social sciences and humanities. I have also read about scholars and
even scientists being attacked and, yes, some have been forced out.
As an actual liberal, I think intellectual discourse is impoverished
if it does not involve civil discussion and debate with those of
differing or opposing views, provided that this discourse is grounded
in substantiated facts, vetted by rules of evidence.  However, good
faith is utterly absent in the attacks of Trump on universities, just
like it was in the attack of his hero, Putin.  Instead, in terms of
national security and prosperity, Trump's attack on scientific
research is the second most stupid thing he has done, next to his
alienation of our allies, which has weakened the U.S. against the "no
limits" alliance of Russia and the PRC.


              --- ENDD NYT "AUTHORITARIAN ENDGAME" ---



3/17/25:  FYI

SENATE INTRODUCES NASA AUTHORIZATION BILL

A bipartisan <E0>100-page bill [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to
reauthorize NASA was introduced in the Senate on March 11. The bill is
co-sponsored by Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee
Chair Ted Cruz (R-TX) and Ranking Member Maria Cantwell (D-WA) in
addition to two Republican and three Democrat members of the
committee. In a <E0>statement, [aip.us17.list-manage.com] Cruz said
the bill <FC>allows commercial space ventures to flourish, builds up a
U.S.-led low-Earth orbit economy, and takes the first step towards
returning America to the Moon and ensuring we will be first on Mars.<FD>
The senators recommended funding NASA at $25.5 billion in FY25, a
slight increase over the agency<F9>s FY24 budget of $24.9 billion, but
the passage of the continuing resolution on Friday will keep NASA
funding at FY24 levels this year. A <E0>similar authorization bill
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] was introduced in December but did not
progress before the end of the last Congress.

The bill explicitly reaffirms congressional support for the Space
Launch System, which has faced criticism [aip.us17.list-manage.com]
for cost overruns and delays. The bill similarly expresses support for
the Mars Sample Return mission but includes thinly veiled criticism of
that mission<F9>s cost and timing, instructing the administrator to
establish a <FC>realistic<FD> cost estimate within 90 days and sign a
fixed-price contract for the mission with industry partners within a
year of the bill<F9>s passage. It also calls for the U.S. to continue
supporting the International Space Station until a commercial
alternative is operational. The ISS is currently set to be deorbited
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] after its operations end in 2030.



v3/18/25:

From: "Kurczynski, Peter (GSFC-6600)" <peter.kurczynski@nasa.gov>
Subject: NASA Advisory Committees and the COPAG
Date: March 18, 2025 at 17:29:10 EDT
To: "copag-ec@bigbang.gsfc.nasa.gov" <copag-ec@bigbang.gsfc.nasa.gov>


External Email - Use Caution


Dear COPAG Executive Committee,

On Wednesday, March 12, the NASA Science Mission Directorate announced
that the advisory committees for each of the five science divisions
within the Science Mission Directorate (Astrophysics, Biological and
Physical Sciences, Earth Science, Heliophysics, and Planetary Science)
will be merged into a single advisory committee with broad
representation from across the NASA science community.<A0> The
Astrophysics Division has three Program Analysis Groups (PAGs): Cosmic
Origins, Exoplanets, and Physics of the Cosmos. These PAGs were
reporting out through the Astrophysics Advisory Committee (APAC).<A0>
The Astrophysics Division intends to continue the activities of those
three PAGs, and their affiliated Science Analysis Groups (SAGs),
Science Interest Groups (SIGs), and Science and Technology Interest
Groups (STIGs).<A0> The Division is working on developing a new
reporting structure for the PAGs so that they can continue to provide
findings of analyses to the NASA Astrophysics Division
Director.<A0>This will be finalized in the coming weeks and an update
will be issued.<A0> In the meantime, the Astrophysics Division would
like to thank all those who serve, or have served, on the PAGs or
their affiliated groups, providing key input into the division<F9>s
activities.

Warm regards,
Peter


3/19/25: NASA Watch: Internal NASA Memo: NSSC Active Contracts Review

Keith<F9>s note: this went out to a vast portion of the NASA workforce
today. I guess we know what people will be working on over the weekend
spreadsheets, not brackets. From what I am told by NASA sources anyone
can see virtually anything they want <F3> even if it is not their own
stuff. No, I do not have <F3> or ever want <F3> access to this sort of
proprietary/confidential stuff. Full memo below (spreadsheet and link
do not work).

PLEASE READ THIS EMAIL IN ITS ENTIRETY

In accordance with Executive Order 14222 a complete review of NSSC
contracts and grants are required. You have been identified as a
technical monitor or contracting officer Representative (COR) with
grants requiring a review. Please access the Power App Link
OP-DataCallResponseTool-PowerApps and select EO14222 Review <F3> NSSC
to complete the following data field:

    Center

    Mission Directorate

    Description of contract/grant requirement

    Planned contract/grant action

    Impact if contract/grant is terminated <F3> Be very specific on
    the impact to programs, projects, and mission. Don<F9>t just
    provide generic information.

    Rationale for not terminating or descoping contract/grant <F3>
    Justify the impact on the agency if this is terminated.

    POC providing justification and impact

    COR (first name and last name) if blank

This review of contracts and grants must be completed by NLT COB 3/26

If you are receiving this email you have been identified as a person
who can provide the required information. Most of you will have more
than one purchase order to enter. The attached spreadsheet has already
been sorted by the EMAIL ADDRESS 1 COLUMN but can be sorted how you
see fit. It is not linked to a sharepoint. Please take this request
very seriously and respond before the deadline. Provide as much
essential detail regarding the impact to the agency if the
requirement(s) are terminated.

Comment from Dave:

    Oh no. I haven't checked my email since 2pm yesterday, but
    believe I might receive this. However, most my contracts, if not
    executed, could result in entire center shutdowns.


3/21/25:  NASA Watch

Keith's note: WRT Janet Petro's update today -- she included a comment
about her standard update closing "Embrace the Challenge". IMHO when
the entire NASA workforce is uncertain about whether they will even
have a job, if their projects will be cancelled, or NASA's future
as the world's leader in space exploration, "Embrace the
Challenge" tends to fall a little short and sound a dull thud as to
what NASA's extended family really needs to hear right now. I went
through the RIF-like effort at Space Station Freedom Level II. I know
exactly what people are going through. So Janet, maybe you should use
that new 5 Question App to ask people how they are doing as this chaos
grinds them down -- and what you can do to help them through. Just
asking them may be enough -- better than a hollow slogan. Just
sayin'.


3/22/25: NASA Watch.  NASA's Ever-Changing Artemis Crew Tagline

Keith's note: there has been a swarm of stories of late about NASA
abandoning the whole "first woman and first person of color" tag line
that the Biden Administration used with regard to Artemis lunar
missions -- which evolved further to "NASA will land the first woman,
first person of color, and first international partner astronaut on
the Moon". That tagline evolved out of the Trump 1.0 Administration's
original "first woman" preface as to who'd be landing on the Moon. Now
that's all gone as part of the DEI purge and shunning of
international partners that has been inflicted upon all of the Federal
Government by Trump 2.0.

I saw this coming. A lot of us did. On 23 January 2025 I posted
"NASA's First Woman, First Person Of Color" Artemis Tagline: "Let's
see how the Diversity purge affects this popular opening line for NASA
Artemis postings." BTW while the graphic NASA used to symbolize the
Biden Administration's stance on Artemis crews has been taken down,
like everything else, it can be found on the Internet Archive here.


3/26/25: 

xFrom uvstig@lists.nasa.gov Wed Mar 26 14:08:47 2025
Date: Wed, 26 Mar 2025 14:07:12
From: Stephan McCandliss via UV STIG <uvstig@lists.nasa.gov>
Reply-To: Stephan McCandliss <stephan.mccandliss@jhu.edu>
To: "pha-cas@lists.johnshopkins.edu" <pha-cas@lists.johnshopkins.edu>
Cc: "copag-ec@bigbang.gsfc.nasa.gov" <copag-ec@bigbang.gsfc.nasa.gov>, "uvstig@lists.nasa.gov" <uvstig@lists.nasa.gov>
Subject: [UV STIG] Fwd: USRA Legislative Update from Washington

A particularly interesting FYI...

      Begin forwarded message:

From: "Hammond, Eric S." <ehammond@usra.edu>
Subject: USRA Legislative Update from Washington
Date: March 26, 2025 at 13:27:11 EDT
To: stephan.mccandliss <stephan.mccandliss@jhu.edu>

A close up of a sign Description automatically generated

Dear Professor McCandliss:

USRA provides periodic updates to the Council of Institutions (COI) on
legislative activities of interest to the university community engaged in
space and aeronautics-related research and education. The information
contained herein is non-proprietary and may be shared with colleagues.<U+200B>

The point of contact for these legislative updates is Eric Hammond,
Director of Corporate and Government Affairs (email: ehammond@usra.edu).<U+200B>

In this update, the following topics are discussed:<U+200B>

 1. Continuing Resolution Enacted; NASA Funding Remains at FY24 Levels
    An overview of the recently passed continuing resolution that
    maintains NASA's funding at Fiscal Year 2024 levels through September
    30, 2025, and its implications for the agency's operations and
    initiatives.
 2. NASA's Budget Outlook Under the Current Administration and
    Congressional Leadership
    An analysis of the current administration's fiscal policies and
    Congressional leadership's NASA priorities.
 3. Senate's NASA Authorization Bill
    A review of the bipartisan NASA Transition Authorization Act of 2025,
    which outlines funding authorizations and strategic directives for the
    agency.
 4. Upcoming and Recent Congressional Hearings Pertinent to NASA
    A summary of recent and forthcoming congressional hearings related to
    NASA, highlighting discussions that are particularly relevant to
    universities and research institutions.
 5. Recent Legislation Pertinent to NASA
    An update on newly introduced bills and legislative actions affecting
    NASA.
6.  Organizational Reviews and DOGE Implications at NASA

A summary of DOGE's ongoing activities and their potential implications
for NASA's workforce, mission planning, and research collaborations.

_____________________________________________________________________________

1. Continuing Resolution Enacted; NASA Funding Remains at FY24 Levels

Congress passed, and the President has signed into law, a continuing
resolution (CR) that maintains government funding at FY 2024 levels
through September 30, 2025. As a result, NASA will see no immediate
funding increases, and any previously planned new initiatives for fiscal
year 2025 remain on hold. Under the CR framework, federal agencies are
prohibited from initiating new programs or significantly increasing
existing funding allocations, obligating NASA to operate within the
constraints of the prior year’s budget.

Consequently, NASA will continue to delay or slow projects initially
slated for additional funding or launch in FY 2025. Historically, during
CR periods, agency officials manage budgets conservatively due to
financial uncertainty and constraints on strategic planning. Extended flat
funding scenarios often compel NASA to defer essential maintenance,
infrastructure upgrades, and mission development, leading to increased
long-term costs and disruptions to mission timelines.

Legislators across party lines have previously highlighted that relying
repeatedly on continuing resolutions compromises the ability of agencies
to undertake strategic, long-term planning. While this CR has effectively
prevented a government shutdown, it continues to place NASA in an
operational holding pattern, raising ongoing concerns about the agency’s
future budgetary health, mission stability, and overall capability to
support research and exploration initiatives, including those led by
university partners.

In response, USRA, working closely with the Issues and Program Committee
(IPC) and its Council of Institutions, continues to advocate for:

·         Robust top-line funding for NASA and sustained research support
across federal science agencies
·         Recognition that science and exploration are inextricably linked
in advancing U.S. leadership in space

·         Strong backing for USRA’s member universities, which span 39
states and the District of Columbia

________________________________________________________________________________

2. NASA’s Budget Outlook Under the Current Administration and
Congressional Leadership

With the new administration and Republican majorities in Congress, NASA’s
budget and strategic direction may see notable changes. The potential
appointment of Jared Isaacman—an entrepreneur known for privately funded
space missions and support for commercial space initiatives—as NASA
Administrator signals possible increased emphasis on private-sector
partnerships and cost-effective exploration strategies, involving
companies such as SpaceX, Rocket Lab, and Firefly Aerospace.

Under Isaacman’s anticipated leadership, the administration may review
NASA’s current portfolio of exploration programs, including the Artemis
program. Particular attention could be given to large, cost-plus
contracts, such as the Space Launch System (SLS) rocket developed by
traditional aerospace firms like Boeing. These programs could be
reevaluated in favor of commercially developed alternatives, such as
SpaceX’s Starship, potentially aimed at reducing costs and accelerating
human exploration of the Moon and Mars.

Alongside this emphasis on commercial innovation, early budget discussions
suggest the administration may propose substantial reductions in NASA’s
science budget, particularly targeting certain Earth science research
areas. Historically, similar proposed reductions have faced significant
scrutiny and bipartisan debate in Congress.

It remains important to note that, regardless of administration proposals,
NASA budgets require congressional approval. Congress has previously
restored funding to many NASA science and education programs that
administrations have sought to reduce, notably including the Office of
STEM Engagement. USRA will continue monitoring these developments,
advocating for sustained support of university-led research and education
initiatives.

________________________________________________________________________________

3. Senate’s NASA Authorization Bill

The Senate recently introduced the NASA Transition Authorization Act of
2025, a bipartisan bill that seeks to define the agency’s strategic
direction and authorize funding levels. It reaffirms support for the
Artemis program, promotes public-private partnerships, and strengthens
STEM education initiatives. While it reflects some administration-aligned
policy shifts, such as potential reductions in Earth science missions, the
bill overall suggests Congress’s continued commitment to sustaining NASA
as a multi-mission agency.

Read the bill here: The NASA Transition Authorization Act of 2025

The authorization bill contains several provisions with direct relevance
to universities:

A. Funding for Science and STEM Programs

 *  Authorizes $7.58 billion for the Science Mission Directorate and
    $143.5 million for the Office of STEM Engagement [Sec. 101, pp. 5–6].
 *  Reaffirms the value of a balanced portfolio (large, medium, and small
    missions) as recommended by decadal surveys [Sec. 601, p. 47].

B. STEM Education and Academic Partnerships

 *  Title VII explicitly supports the National Space Grant College and
    Fellowship Program and efforts to build a skilled technical workforce
    [Sec. 701–702].
 *  The bill emphasizes NASA’s collaboration with universities across
    multiple domains: aeronautics, hypersonics, advanced air mobility, and
    hydrogen aviation [Sec. 502–508, pp. 39–47].

C. Opportunities Through Public-Private and Research Initiatives

 *  Encourages academic involvement in advanced materials research,
    unmanned aircraft systems, and technology development through SBIR
    [Sec. 402–403, Sec. 503–504].
 *  Supports university access to suborbital crew missions and low-Earth
    orbit science platforms [Sec. 305, p. 32].

D. Commercial Low-Earth Orbit Development Program (CLDP)

 *  Directs NASA to maintain a continuous human presence in Low Earth
    Orbit (LEO) and plan a transition from the International Space Station
    (ISS) to commercial space stations, enabling universities to partner
    with industry in conducting research in LEO [Sec. 301–304, pp. 17–27].

E. Cost Cap Oversight for PI-Led Science Missions

 *  Calls for increased accountability in science mission cost estimates
    and adherence to cost caps, which could influence future
    university-led mission proposals [Sec. 602, pp. 48–51].

F. Workforce and Talent Development Initiatives

 *  Establishes a NASA public-private talent program and expands mentoring
    activities to strengthen the early-career pipeline and STEM engagement
    [Sec. 808–809].

G. Earth Observation and Data Access

 *  Directs NASA to evaluate private sector data procurement (e.g., for
    Landsat) and assess implications for scientific continuity and
    academic access [Sec. 604–605, pp. 52–54].

Outlook for Universities

The fact that this bill is bipartisan and resembles House efforts from
last year demonstrates a strong consensus: NASA should remain a
multi-mission agency, advancing exploration, supporting Earth science, and
driving innovation through partnerships. For universities, the legislation
offers a reassuring blueprint. Despite expected pressure from the
administration, Congress appears determined to maintain a broad suite of
programs, many of which directly benefit academic researchers, students,
and university-led missions.
 
One initiative not currently included in the bill—but still a priority for
the USRA Issues and Program Committee (IPC)—is the long-standing proposal
for a university-led small satellite program. The initiative aims to
provide more structured, mission-driven opportunities for students and
researchers to contribute to NASA science through CubeSat and small
satellite development. While it continues to represent a compelling
opportunity to expand hands-on training pipelines and enable broader
access to space-based research, it has yet to gain traction in
legislation. Given the current funding environment, there is even less
appetite for establishing new programs that would require dedicated
authorizations or appropriations. Still, USRA and the IPC remain committed
to advancing the concept.
 
Turning authorization into funded programs will be the next step, and USRA
will continue to engage with appropriators and authorizers to ensure that
university priorities remain at the forefront.
________________________________________________________________________________

4. Upcoming and Recent Congressional Hearings Pertinent to NASA

This section provides an overview of recent and upcoming congressional
hearings related to NASA, with a focus on matters of interest to
universities and institutions. The hearings involve the House Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology; the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation; and the House and Senate Appropriations Committees.<U+200B>

Upcoming Hearings

 *  April 1, 2025, 10:00 AM EDT
    Space & Aeronautics Subcommittee Hearing - Leveraging Commercial
    Innovation for Lunar Exploration: A Review of NASA’s CLPS Initiative
    This hearing will review NASA's Commercial Lunar Payload Services
    (CLPS) initiative, focusing on how commercial innovations are being
    leveraged for lunar exploration and potential opportunities for
    university partnerships. You may view the hearing here.

Recent Hearings

 *  March 26, 2025, 10:00 AM EDT
    Environment Subcommittee Hearing - To the Depths, and Beyond:
    Examining Blue Economy Technologies
    This hearing explored advancements in oceanic technologies and their
    implications for environmental research and the economy. While not
    exclusively focused on NASA, the discussion included topics relevant
    to Earth observation and climate studies. You may view the
    hearing here.
 *  February 26, 2025, 10:00 AM EST
    Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee Hearing - Step by Step: The Artemis
    Program and NASA's Path to Human Exploration of the Moon, Mars, and
    Beyond
    The hearing examined the progress and plans of NASA's Artemis program,
    with a focus on human exploration initiatives and potential
    opportunities for university partnerships. You may view the
    hearing here. 
 *  February 25, 2025, 10:00 AM EST
    Nominations Hearing for Michael Kratsios to Lead the Office of Science
    and Technology Policy and Mark Meador to Serve as a Federal Trade
    Commissioner
    This hearing evaluated the nominations of Michael Kratsios for
    Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy and Mark
    Meador for Federal Trade Commissioner, positions influencing science
    and technology policy relevant to NASA and academic institutions. You
    may view the hearing here.
 *  February 12, 2025, 10:00 AM EST
    Energy Subcommittee Hearing - From Transformative Science to
    Technological Breakthroughs: DOE’s National Laboratories
    While centered on the Department of Energy's national laboratories,
    discussions included collaborative efforts with NASA, highlighting
    interdisciplinary research opportunities for universities. You may
    view the hearing here.
________________________________________________________________________________

5. Recent Legislation Pertinent to NASA:

1. H.R.1368 – DOE and NASA Interagency Research Coordination Act
Sponsor: Rep. Nicholas Begich [R-AK-At Large]
Committees: House – Science, Space, and Technology
Date of Introduction: February 14, 2025
Latest Action: Referred to the House Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology on February 14, 2025.
Summary: Establishes interagency coordination between the Department of
Energy (DOE) and NASA for research activities.

________________________________________________________________________________

2. H.R.390 – ACERO Act
Sponsor: Rep. Vince Fong [R-CA-20]
Committees: House – Science, Space, and Technology
Date of Introduction: January 14, 2025
Latest Action: Referred to the House Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology on January 14, 2025.
Summary: Promotes advanced computing and engineering research
opportunities.

________________________________________________________________________________


3. H.R.477 – MACH Act
Sponsor: Rep. Vince Fong [R-CA-20]
Committees: House – Science, Space, and Technology
Date of Introduction: January 16, 2025
Latest Action: Referred to the House Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology on January 16, 2025.
Summary: Supports hypersonic research and development initiatives.

________________________________________________________________________________


4. H.R.1626 – Edward J. Dwight, Jr., Congressional Gold Medal Act of 2025
Sponsor: Rep. Joe Neguse [D-CO-2]
Committees: House – Financial Services
Date of Introduction: February 26, 2025
Latest Action: Referred to the House Committee on Financial Services on
February 26, 2025.
Summary: Awards the Congressional Gold Medal to Edward J. Dwight, Jr. for
his achievements.

________________________________________________________________________________


5. H.R.108 – Space Research Innovation Act
Sponsor: Rep. Andy Biggs [R-AZ-5]
Committees: House – Science, Space, and Technology
Date of Introduction: January 3, 2025
Latest Action: Referred to the House Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology on January 3, 2025.
Summary: Encourages innovation in space research through expanded grant
opportunities.

________________________________________________________________________________


6. Bill to Institute RIF Moratorium at the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Sponsor: TBD
Committees: House – Science, Space, and Technology
Date of Introduction: TBD
Latest Action: 
Summary: Prohibits any reduction in force (RIF) at NASA until Congress
enacts FY26 appropriations
________________________________________________________________________________


 
7. The NASA Transition Authorization Act of 2025
Sponsor: Sen. Ted Cruz [R-TX], Sen. Maria Cantwell [D-WA]
Committees: Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
Date of Introduction: TBD
Latest Action: NA
Summary: Reauthorizes NASA's programs and activities through fiscal year
2025, establishing and revising initiatives related to space exploration,
research, and technology.

________________________________________________________________________________


6. Organizational Reviews and DOGE Implications at NASA
The Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) is currently undertaking
assessments across federal agencies to identify possible opportunities for
increased efficiency and organizational alignment. In response, NASA has
begun preliminary internal planning exercises to align with this process,
including reviews of mission support functions and organizational
structures.
 
NASA’s Acting Administrator has communicated regularly with agency staff
about these assessments, emphasizing that discussions remain exploratory,
and no formal decisions or directives have been issued at this stage. The
ongoing budget constraints associated with the current continuing
resolution add complexity to NASA's long-term strategic planning
processes.
 
USRA continues to closely monitor these assessments, recognizing their
potential implications for NASA's workforce stability, university
partnerships, and multi-year research initiatives. Throughout this
process, USRA remains committed to highlighting and protecting the
importance of university-led science, research, and innovation.
____________________________________________________________



3/25/25:  Spacenews.  NASA terminating $420 million in contracts 

NASA is terminating $420 million in contracts the agency says are
redundant or <FC>misaligned<FD> with its core priorities, but has
provided few details about what is being cut.

In a statement to SpaceNews late March 24, NASA press secretary
Bethany Stevens confirmed a post by the Department of Government
Efficiency (DOGE) that NASA had terminated about $420 million in
unneeded<FD> contracts.

<FC>NASA is committed to optimizing its workforce and resources in
alignment with the Department of Government Efficiency<F9>s
initiatives. As part of this effort, NASA has identified and phased
out $420 million in contracts that were determined to be redundant or
misaligned with our core mission priorities,<FD> Stevens said in the
statement.

<FC>This streamlining effort ensures that taxpayer dollars are
directed toward the highest-impact projects while maintaining
NASA<F9>s essential functions at the highest level of execution,<FD>
she continued. <FC>In total, we are aiming for these measures to
result in considerably more savings for the American people,
reinforcing our commitment to efficiency, innovation, and continued
leadership in space exploration.<FD>

NASA did not answer questions about specific contracts selected for
termination or details about how it determined those contracts were
redundant or misaligned. The DOGE post, published just before midnight
March 21, said only that it included three contracts worth $15 million
each to consultancies for <FC>Change Management Support Services.<FD>



APRIL 


4/1/25: FYI.  NSF CONSTRUCTION BUDGET DEFUNDED AS TRUMP CHALLENGES
        ‘EMERGENCY’ SPENDING / The president eliminated the agency’s
        budget for major construction by disputing “emergency”
        appropriations made by Congress.

The National Science Foundation’s budget for major construction
projects is set to be eliminated for fiscal year 2025 after President
Donald Trump canceled some of the “emergency” funds appropriated by
Congress last month. Top Senate appropriators argue the action is
illegal and puts at risk all $12.4 billion of the emergency funding
allocated across agencies including NASA.

If Trump’s decision stands, it is unclear if NSF would be able to
transfer money from other accounts to cover the $234 million shortfall
in its Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction (MREFC)
account. This hole in the agency’s budget represents a 2.6% cut to its
fiscal year 2024 topline of $9 billion.  Congress funded the MREFC
account using emergency funding that was agreed to in a 2023
bipartisan side deal that allowed legislators to exceed spending caps
set in law. Appropriators used the same funding method for MREFC in
the final spending legislation for fiscal year 2025, enacted last
month, which largely carries forward spending levels from the prior
year.

Trump wrote to Congress last week declaring that the MREFC funding and
10 other accounts were “improperly designated by Congress as
emergency” in the 2023 side deal. “I do not concur that the added
spending is truly for emergency needs,” he added.

Appropriators on both sides of the aisle objected to Trump’s move as
an encroachment on their spending power. Sens. Susan Collins (R-ME)
and Patty Murray (D-WA), who lead the Senate Appropriations Committee,
sent a letter to the Office of Management and Budget stating that the
language of the appropriations legislation “has always been
interpreted to give the president a binary choice: He must concur with
all or none of Congress’s emergency designations.”

Murray highlighted in a press release how the decision jeopardizes the
MREFC funding as well as $100 million for procurement and construction
projects at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Both
Collins and Murray said the availability of all the emergency funding
could now be at risk, including the $9 billion that Trump approved,
which includes $250 million of NASA’s construction and environ

Current MREFC Projects

The MREFC account funds major projects that cost over $100 million to
construct as well as “mid-scale” research infrastructure that costs
between $20 million and $100 million to construct. The $234 million
appropriated by Congress for the account in fiscal year 2025 already
falls short of NSF’s requested amount of $300 million.

The agency requested $60 million for Antarctic infrastructure
upgrades, such as building a new pier at the McMurdo research station
to replace the ice pier where resupply vessels offload, which has
failed three times in the last 12 years. “If the infrastructure that
enables Antarctic science is not kept robust and efficient, [the
U.S. Antarctic Program] is at risk of losing science capabilities year
over year as facilities, utilities, equipment, and the vehicle fleet
degrade,” the agency wrote in its budget request.

NSF also requested $154 million for the Leadership-Class Computing
Facility in Texas, which will host an academic research supercomputer
that will provide a hundredfold improvement for AI applications
compared to NSF’s current leading computing system, according to the
agency. NSF previously said that it expected the facility to begin
operations in 2026.

NSF further requested $85 million to fund mid-scale infrastructure
projects across all research disciplines funded by the
agency. Projects recently funded in this category include a new
weather radar system, Cosmic Microwave Background astronomy
instrumentation, and a compact X-ray free electron laser facility.
Many other major projects have been waiting in the wings for MREFC
funding.  These include the Giant Magellan Telescope and the Thirty
Meter Telescope, either of which would require a significant and
sustained MREFC budget increase in order to move forward with NSF
support — a possibility that now appears even more distant.

NSF declined to comment on how Trump’s decision might affect its
infrastructure projects.

Skip to content <#main>
Ars Technica home


4/10/25:  

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN
April 10, 2025
NASA Administrator Nominee Wants More Flagship Science Missions
Clare Zhang
Jared Isaacman expressed confidence that NASA could stand up additional missions
in basic science and space exploration despite committee Democrats’ budget
concerns.

Jared Isaacman

Jared Isaacman, President Trump’s nominee for NASA administrator, at his Senate
confirmation hearing on April 9. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation
Committee

Jared Isaacman, President Donald Trump’s pick to lead NASA, told senators it
would be feasible to have “multiple flagship scientific missions at once” on top
of space exploration efforts and expressed enthusiasm for basic science at the
agency. Isaacman said Trump is “looking to usher in a golden age of science and
discovery,” while committee Democrats pointed to recent layoffs, contract
terminations, and proposed budget cuts at the agency.

At his nomination hearing Wednesday before the Senate Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation, Isaacman introduced himself as “not a typical
nominee” for the NASA administrator position.

“I’ve been relatively apolitical. I am not a scientist. I never worked at NASA,”
he said. “I do not think these are weaknesses. In fact, I believe President
Trump found them to be strengths.”

Isaacman is a billionaire tech CEO who has commanded two private orbital
missions led by SpaceX. His nomination has been praised by various space
industry stakeholders while drawing criticism from some conservative groups and
activists due to his past donations to Democratic campaigns and the diversity
initiatives of companies he has been involved with.

In his opening remarks, Isaacman said one of his primary objectives would be to
make NASA “a force multiplier for science.” He told senators NASA should
concentrate its resources on science with no obvious economic return and
“undertake the near impossible” so that industry and academic institutions can
build upon the agency’s discoveries.

He also pointed to NASA’s challenges, saying that most of its programs are over
budget and behind schedule. Isaacman has criticized aspects of NASA’s human
space exploration programs in recent years, calling the Space Launch System
rocket “outrageously expensive” while petitioning the agency to fully fund the
Chandra X-ray telescope. NASA had planned to decommission Chandra last year due
to budget shortfalls in fiscal year 2025 but delayed that decision following
pushback from scientists and Congress.

At the same time, Isaacman told Committee Chair Ted Cruz (R-TX) that NASA could
“absolutely” stand up full missions to the Moon and to Mars, as well as run more
scientific missions.

Sen. Gary Peters (D-MI) asked Isaacman if this would still be possible with
budget cuts to NASA, adding that he believes “it’s pretty clear we’re likely to
see constrained budgets.”

“If I’m confirmed, I absolutely am going to roll up my sleeves and get in the
trenches with the best and brightest and figure out where we have our program
challenges, what’s impeding progress, clear those obstacles and get back to
delivering on the mission,” Isaacman answered. “If we can do that, then we’re
going to get the inspirational side of NASA going, we’re going to get the STEM
side growing, and the next generation is going to grow up and want to reach even
farther.”

TIES TO MUSK

Cruz asked Isaacman whether he would commit to maintaining the International
Space Station at least through 2030 if it is safe and scientifically feasible to
do so. The CHIPS and Science Act authorizes funds for the ISS to 2030 and NASA
currently plans to deorbit the station after that.

“There were those in the [first Trump] administration pushing to deorbit the
International Space Station prematurely,” Cruz added. Democratic senators also
noted that Elon Musk has suggested that the ISS should be deorbited as soon as
possible to focus on a mission to Mars and that his company SpaceX has been
awarded the contract to deorbit the ISS.

“Given that we’ve invested over $100 billion in the station, I think that would
be profoundly foolish to give up on that investment, as long as it is safe to
continue using it,” Cruz added.

Isaacman told senators he did not know of any reason why the ISS should be
brought down before 2030 and he would like to understand Musk’s reasoning. “What

I do think we need to do is maximize its remaining life, get as much of the high
potential science and research to the station, figure out what that space
economy is, so when the day does come to hand it off to the commercial LEO
[low-Earth orbit] destinations they are in a financially self-sustaining type of
way,” he added.

Sen. Ed Markey (D-MA) questioned Isaacman’s “deep personal and financial ties”
to Musk, including paying millions of dollars to SpaceX for two private space
flights and investing tens of millions in SpaceX, as well as his company
maintaining a partnership with Starlink worth millions each year. Markey also
referenced reporting that Musk personally asked Isaacman to lead NASA and asked
whether this was true.

“You can understand why the public would be concerned about conflicts of
interest here,” Markey added.

Isaacman did not answer whether Musk was present when Trump offered him the
administrator position but told senators that he has not had any communication
with Musk regarding his plan to manage NASA since the nomination.

Peters asked Isaacman how he would make sure Musk is not allowed undue influence
over awarding or implementation of contracts, saying that Musk serves as both
the CEO of SpaceX and a White House employee as the head of the Department of
Government Efficiency that has slashed federal spending and contracts.
“My loyalty is to this nation, the space agency, and their world-changing
mission,” Isaacman answered. “They’re the contractors. NASA is the customer.
They work for us, not the other way around.”

AGENCY CHANGES UNDER TRUMP

In her opening statement, Ranking Member Maria Cantwell (D-WA) referenced
reporting that NASA has laid off workers including its chief scientist,
economist, and technologist; canceled research grants and $420 million in
contracts; and may slash its science budget by 50%. She asked Isaacman whether
he would reorganize NASA by closing any of its ten centers without congressional
authorization and whether there should be personnel or budget cuts.

Isaacman did not specify whether he would close any of the centers or cut agency
resources, saying he is “eager to understand” the considerations and current
discussions around reorganization.

“I think NASA is going to require the best and brightest from across the nation
and all of our critical infrastructure in order to achieve its mission,” he
said.

Markey asked Isaacman whether he would commit to fully restoring and maintaining
access to NASA’s data and to resisting any political pressure to sideline
climate research at the agency. Markey pointed to reporting that previously
publicly accessible climate datasets and visualizations have been altered or
taken down since Trump took office.

Isaacman said he had not been made aware of any such changes to NASA datasets.




  Trump White House budget proposal eviscerates science funding at NASA

"This would decimate American leadership in space."

Eric Berger <https://arstechnica.com/author/ericberger/> – Apr 11, 2025
9:15 AM | 292


This week, as part of the process to develop a budget for fiscal-year
2026, the Trump White House shared the draft version of its budget
request for NASA with the space agency.

This initial version of the administration's budget request calls for an
approximately 20 percent overall cut to the agency's budget across the
board, effectively $5 billion from an overall topline of about $25
billion. However, the majority of the cuts are concentrated within the
agency's Science Mission Directorate, which oversees all planetary
science, Earth science, astrophysics research, and more.

According to the "passback" documents given to NASA officials on
Thursday, the space agency's science programs would receive nearly a 50
percent cut in funding. After the agency received $7.5 billion for
science in fiscal-year 2025, the Trump administration has proposed a
science topline budget of just $3.9 billion for the coming fiscal year.


    Detailing the cuts

Among the proposals were: A two-thirds cut to astrophysics, down to $487
million; a greater than two-thirds cut to heliophysics, down to $455
million; a greater than 50 percent cut to Earth science, down to $1.033
billion; and a 30 percent cut to Planetary science, down to $1.929 billion.

Although the budget would continue support for ongoing missions such as
the Hubble Space Telescope and the James Webb Space Telescope, it would
kill the much-anticipated Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, an
observatory seen as on par with those two world-class instruments that
is already fully assembled and on budget for a launch in two years.

"Passback supports continued operation of the Hubble and James Webb
Space Telescopes and assumes no funding is provided for other
telescopes," the document states.

Other significant cuts include ending funding for Mars Sample Return as
well as the DAVINCI mission to Venus. The budget cuts also appear
intended to force the closure of Goddard Space Flight Center in
Maryland, where the agency has 10,000 civil servants and contractors.


    The passback process

The cuts are in line with what Ars Technica exclusively reported last
month
<https://arstechnica.com/space/2025/03/white-house-may-seek-to-slash-nasas-science-budget-by-50-percent/>,
that the Trump administration was considering a massive 50-percent cut
to NASA's science programs. Publicly, some officials downplayed these
concerns. As recently as this week, NASA's acting administrator, Janet
Petro, characterized this reporting
<https://spacenews.com/nasa-developing-options-for-agency-restructuring-in-unsettling-environment/>
as "rumors from really not credible sources."

However, science policy experts have been more alarmed, characterizing
such cuts as an "extinction level" event for what is seen as the crown
jewel of the space agency. Nearly all of NASA's most significant
achievements over the last 25 years have been delivered by the science
programs, including feats such as /Ingenuity/ flying on Mars, New
Horizons swooping by Pluto, and Cassini's discovery of water plumes on
Enceladus.

This passback document represents just the opening salvo of the process
to establish a federal budget for fiscal-year 2026, which begins on
October 1 of this year. The budget is produced by the White House Office
of Management and Budget, which is overseen by Russell Vought, who has
long made his anti-science budgeting priorities clear
<https://americarenewing.com/issue/budget/> through his Center for
Renewing America.

The Trump administration nominee to lead NASA, private astronaut Jared
Isaacman, said during a confirmation hearing this week
<https://arstechnica.com/space/2025/04/isaacman-sls-and-orion-are-not-a-long-term-solution-for-nasa/>
that he strongly supported NASA's science programs. It is unlikely
that Isaacman was involved in drafting this document, as he has not
yet been confirmed by the US Senate. Nominees, typically, are excluded
from policy prior to confirmation.

After receiving passback documents, NASA usually has 72 hours to review
the materials and then submit appeals and justification for changes. Any
modifications are then incorporated into a final document that becomes
the "President's Budget Request" for the next fiscal year. It is unclear
when the Trump administration plans to release this budget request, a
public document. It could happen within the next four to six weeks.


    Congress will likely fight back

Following this, the White House will work with Congress to actually set
the budget. The US House and Senate each have separate appropriations
committees that consider (or not) the White House priorities in
establishing a final budget that the president must then sign into law.
Fierce opposition to some of these NASA cuts is likely in Congress.

"This massive cut to NASA Science will not stand," US Rep. George
Whitesides, D-California, told Ars. "For weeks we have been raising the
alarm about a rumored 50 percent cut to NASA's world-leading science
efforts. Now we know it is true. I will work alongside my colleagues on
the Science Committee to make clear how this would decimate American
leadership in space and inflict great damage to NASA centers across the
country."

One concern, however, is that should the budgeting process be delayed—as
is often the case with the federal budget—the White House could force
agencies to make operational plans based on the president's budget
request once the new fiscal year begins on October 1. Again, this will
depend on negotiations with Congress, but, using a process called
impoundment,
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impoundment_of_appropriated_funds> some
Trump officials believe it may be possible to turn the budget request
into an actual budget for all intents and purposes.

Photo of Eric Berger <https://arstechnica.com/author/ericberger/> Eric
Berger <https://arstechnica.com/author/ericberger/> Senior Space Editor
Eric Berger <https://arstechnica.com/author/ericberger/> Senior Space
Editor
Eric Berger is the senior space editor at Ars Technica, covering
everything from astronomy to private space to NASA policy, and author of
two books: /Liftoff/
<https://www.harpercollins.com/products/liftoff-eric-berger?variant=32126620205090>, about the rise of SpaceX; and /Reentry/ <https://benbellabooks.com/shop/reentry/>, on the development of the Falcon 9 rocket and Dragon. A certified meteorologist, Eric lives in Houston.

292 Comments
<https://arstechnica.com/space/2025/04/trump-white-house-budget-proposal-eviscerates-science-funding-at-nasa/#comments>




4/11/25:


xFrom rwo@virginia.edu Fri Apr 11 13:40:39 2025
Date: Fri, 11 Apr 2025 13:40:26
From: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
To: "astro-alldept@virginia.edu" <astro-alldept@virginia.edu>
Cc: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
Subject: Huge budget cuts proposed for NASA Astrophysics

I hesitate to draw your attention to the following article.  It will
not make your day.

https://arstechnica.com/space/2025/04/trump-white-house-budget-proposal-eviscerates-science-funding-at-nasa/

This would be a good time for everyone to go to the AAS public
advocacy page at

      https://aas.org/advocacy/get-involved

and see how you might be able to help.

          -- RWO


xFrom awootten@nrao.edu Sat Apr 12 09:44:22 2025
Date: Sat, 12 Apr 2025 09:44:10
From: Al Wootten <awootten@nrao.edu>
To: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
Subject: Re: [astro-nraoadjunct] Huge budget cuts proposed for NASA Astrophysics {External}

Congressmen written, so all will be well...  One disaster after another!
Thanks for the heads up!
Al

Sent from my Verizon, Samsung Galaxy smartphone
Get Outlook for Android



4/13/25: :at 12:00 

THIS LETTER SENT to my Congressman John McGuire, using McGuire's online
site for sending mail:

     https://mcguire.house.gov/contact/email-me

Was a little glitchy and had to start over again to get on
the right track.

Note that I used a "Mr." prefix and did not reference my
UVa email address or any other indication of UVa affiliation. 


=================================================================

Dear Representative McGuire:

I strongly urge you to sign the bipartisan Congressional letter in
support of full funding for NASA's science programs.  These have
supported three generations of space scientists and guaranteed that
the US is the undisputed world leader in space science.

NASA's Science Mission Directorate has delivered some of the
most spectacular scientific discoveries of the last fifty years --
discoveries that have inspired hundreds of thousands of young
people to become scientists and engineers.  There are few, if any,
federal investments that have produced a better return for education
and building the STEM workforce in this country.

Since Virginia hosts one of the few NASA launch sites at Wallops
Island and also the large NASA Langley Research Center, space science
is also an important contributor to its economy.

        Sincerely yours,

           Robert W. O'Connell

=================================================================

The tag was omitted, since name, address, email and phone were
entered separately.  

------------------------------------------------------------------
 Robert W. O'Connell                  Email: rwo.conne@gmail.com
 5532 Wyant Lane
 Charlottesville, VA  22903-7325  USA
 Home phone: 434-823-6154
 Cell phone: 434-981-3458
------------------------------------------------------------------

Note that there was no way to arrange for a CC to myself, so there
is no record of the message in either of my email accounts.  Just
this file version.  

Separately, had logged into my (infrequently used) Gmail account 
and cleaned out a lot of trash.  Note that I will be getting
McGuire's newletters at the gmail address(!) 


4/14/25: 

xFrom fyi@aipcomm.org Mon Apr 14 17:11:31 2025
Date: Mon, 14 Apr 2025 17:10:31
From: FYI <fyi@aipcomm.org>
To: rwo@virginia.edu
Subject: This Week: DOE caps indirect costs / Trump poised to seek massive science cuts in 2026 budget / More university research frozen

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
THIS WEEK
THE WEEK OF APRIL 14, 2025
What's Ahead
The Department of Energy headquarters in Washington, D.C.
The Department of Energy headquarters in Washington, D.C. DOE

DOE SHARPLY CUTS FUNDS FOR INDIRECT COSTS OF UNIVERSITY RESEARCH

The Department of Energy announced last week it will immediately cap indirect
cost rates at 15% to “halt inefficient spending” by universities, mirroring a
move by NIH in February that has been blocked by a federal judge. DOE stated the
uniform cap will save over $405 million annually and “help improve efficiency,
reduce costs and ensure proper stewardship of American taxpayer dollars.” The
DOE and NIH moves signal a sea change in the federal government’s attitude
toward financing indirect costs, which support activities such as equipment and
facilities maintenance, IT services, and administrative support. “The purpose of
Department of Energy funding to colleges and universities is to support
scientific research – not foot the bill for administrative costs and facility
upgrades,” Energy Secretary Chris Wright said in a statement.

University groups quickly moved to contest DOE’s move. “This is a ruinous
policy. Our nation’s economic competitors are laughing at another self-inflicted
policy wound that will slow the pace of American research and innovation,” said
Matt Owens, president of the Council on Government Relations, an association of
research institutions. “We stand ready to work with the Trump administration to
improve research indirect costs policy and to reduce the red tape encumbering
federally sponsored research.” COGR recently issued a document of
recommendations to improve government efficiency in research management and
joined other research associations in announcing an effort to develop a new
funding model for indirect costs. DOE’s press release says that the average rate
of indirect costs incurred by the department’s grant recipients at colleges and
universities is more than 30%.

TRUMP’S BUDGET LIKELY TO PROPOSE MAJOR SCIENCE CUTS

Leaked drafts of President Donald Trump’s upcoming budget request to Congress
suggest he plans to seek massive cuts to science programs. A preliminary version
of the budget revealed last week proposes cutting NASA’s Science Mission
Directorate by about 50% to $3.9 billion for fiscal year 2026. A similar
document for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration calls for
cutting the agency’s budget by 27% to $4.5 billion and eliminating its Office of
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research. Some of that office’s research would be
transferred to other parts of NOAA, according to press accounts of the proposal.
Research groups have reacted with alarm to the prospect of such cuts. The
American Astronomical Society stated last week that a 50% cut to NASA’s science
directorate would be “catastrophic to our nation’s leadership in the space
sciences, damaging a broad range of research areas that are unlikely to be
supported by the private sector.” In anticipation of proposed budget cuts, the
American Meteorological Society issued an open letter to Americans last month
highlighting the economic benefits of federal science funding, and the American
Physical Society is collecting stories of the positive impacts of research
funded by federal agencies. (These three groups are AIP Member Societies.)
Meanwhile, the House and Senate have begun preparing to draft their own budget
proposals for the upcoming fiscal year. The chairs of the Senate Appropriations
Committee put out their initial instructions for the appropriations process last
week, including how to submit requests for earmarks, and said hearings will
commence later this month. House appropriators put out similar instructions
earlier this month and have already begun their budget hearings.

MORE UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FROZEN BY TRUMP ADMINISTRATION

The Trump administration apparently has ordered the National Institutes of
Health to stop paying investigators on all existing agency-funded projects at
Columbia University and block new funding as it pressures the university to take
certain actions in response to an antisemitism probe, according to Science. The
administration is also seeking formal oversight of the university through a
legal agreement called a consent decree, according to The Wall Street Journal.
The agreement would likely require negotiation between the administration and
the university under the oversight of a judge. The administration already froze
$400 million in research funding last month to pressure the university to take
various actions, such as hiring security officers who can remove people from
campus or arrest them and placing departments focused on Middle Eastern, South
Asian, and African Studies under the oversight of a new official rather than
faculty.

Meanwhile, the administration has increasingly used research funding as a lever
to pressure additional universities to implement its policy priorities. For
instance, last week Cornell and Northwestern received stop-work orders and
funding-freeze notices spanning grants from several agencies. Among the affected
projects is a collaboration between the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source
and the Air Force Research Lab, Scientific American reported. Harvard
University, which is under threat of a sweeping freeze on federal research
funding, announced today it would not comply with the administration’s demands,
arguing they exceed federal authorities and violate First Amendment protections.

NOAA REFIRES PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has reportedly refired
hundreds of probationary employees who were first fired in February and then
reinstated and put on administrative leave in March. Former NOAA employees
impacted by the decision expressed dismay on social media, describing the
experience as a “roller coaster” and a “wild and silly process,” for instance.
NOAA’s actions followed the news last Wednesday that an appeals court stayed a
Maryland judge’s ruling preventing 18 federal agencies from firing probationary
employees in certain states. The day before, the Supreme Court paused a similar
but separate ruling by a San Francisco judge, effectively halting the
reinstatement of fired probationary workers nationwide at six government
departments: Defense, Energy, Interior, Treasury, Agriculture, and Veterans
Affairs.

ALSO ON OUR RADAR

 *  NSF halved the number of awards from its flagship Graduate Research
    Fellowship program to 1,000 while leaving open the possibility of making
    more awards depending on “future resourcing considerations.”
 *  The Trump administration has canceled a major contract supporting the U.S.
    Global Change Research Program and fired several of its staff, according to
    Politico. The administration also canceled $4 million in climate research
    grants at Princeton University, including for the Cooperative Institute for
    Modeling the Earth System, stating it “promotes exaggerated and implausible
    climate threats.” It is unclear if CIMES has been fully defunded, as it was
    last renewed in 2023 for $85 million over the following five years.
 *  NIH has barred scientists working in China, Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Russia,
    and Venezuela from accessing various biomedical databases, citing a
    Biden-era executive order that directed actions to better protect Americans’
    data from adversarial countries. Separately, the Justice Department issued
    an FAQ last week about the executive order implementation.
 *  In response to Trump’s tariffs, China reportedly halted most exports of rare
    earth magnets and six rare earth metals pending implementation of a new
    export licensing process.
 *  Last week, Trump ordered investigations into state laws “burdening” energy
    generation, with an emphasis on those that mention climate change,
    environmental justice, or greenhouse gas emissions. Trump also ordered DOE
    to “accelerate the development, deployment, and commercialization of coal
    technologies” and to study using coal to power AI data centers.
 *  Data-focused organizations have formed a coalition to support efforts to
    “rescue” public federal datasets that are at risk of becoming inaccessible.


4/16/25:

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN
April 16, 2025

Judge Blocks DOE Move to Cut Indirect Cost Rate
Clare Zhang

Universities sued the Department of Energy for abruptly cutting its
facilities and administrative cost rates for research grants.

A federal judge issued a temporary restraining order today after the
Department of Energy announced Friday that it would place a 15% cap on
indirect cost rates for university research grants and terminate
current grants that do not adhere to the cap. Universities and higher
education associations sued the department on Monday, arguing that the
change was “arbitrary and capricious” and does not follow the
government’s own indirect cost regulations.

DOE stated that the average rate of indirect costs incurred by the
department’s grant recipients at colleges and universities is more
than 30% and that the cap would save over $405 million annually. DOE
currently awards more than $2.5 billion annually to more than 300
universities.

   [Yes, it would save money by NOT DOING RESEARCH.]

“The purpose of Department of Energy funding to colleges and
universities is to support scientific research – not foot the bill for
administrative costs and facility upgrades,” Energy Secretary Chris
Wright said in the announcement.  The plaintiffs asked the court to
prohibit DOE from putting the rate cap policy into effect and from
terminating any grants where a grantee refuses to accept an indirect
cost rate below their institution’s negotiated rate.

The plaintiffs include nine universities that are expected to lose
millions of dollars in indirect cost recovery annually under the DOE
cap. These range from MIT, which would lose more than $15 million in
indirect cost recovery over the next year, to Michigan State
University, which would lose $32 million in indirect cost recovery
annually, according to the lawsuit. Brown, Cornell, and Princeton are
also plaintiffs and have separately had hundreds of millions of
dollars in research grants frozen by the Trump administration earlier
this month.

Indirect costs, also known as facilities and administrative (F&A)
costs, are used to cover research-related expenses such as equipment
and facilities maintenance, IT services, and administrative
support. Indirect costs are paid in addition to direct research costs
and are often expressed as a percentage. For example, an indirect cost
rate of 50% means that for every dollar awarded as part of a research
grant for eligible direct costs, the institution would receive an
additional 50 cents to cover indirect costs. In that case, indirect
costs would represent one-third of the total award.

Brown’s Vice President for Research Greg Hirth wrote in a filing with
the court that the new policy would force the university to eliminate
research-related administrative and facilities maintenance positions,
stop graduate students’ work and thereby hinder their degree
completion, and reduce or close experimental and computational
facilities.

For universities, indirect cost rates are typically negotiated by
either the Department of Health and Human Services or the Department
of Defense’s Office of Naval Research, normally depending on which
agency provided more funds directly to the university in the last
three years. All other agencies must use this negotiated rate for
their grants to that university, the lawsuit states. Rates are
negotiated based on the university’s documented costs and can be
adjusted if an audit establishes that the university has recovered
excess costs.  “DOE denigrates ‘indirect cost payments’ as ‘not for
the department’s direct research funding,’” the lawsuit states. “But
DOE ignores that indirect costs are often necessary for DOE’s own
research to continue: Cutting-edge research, for example, requires
physical infrastructure and equipment, ethics review boards, and many
other costs that are not traceable to specific grants but are
nonetheless essential for the work.”

The lawsuit argues that the policy change does not follow required
procedures or provide appropriate justification to deviate from
negotiated indirect cost rates. The new policy also fails to consider
“reliance interests,” including institutions’ long-term budget
planning around established indirect cost rates and the early career
scientists who will lose their jobs as a result of grant cuts, the
lawsuit adds.

Regarding current grants, the lawsuit further argues that terminating
these grants based on a new cap would be illegal. Agencies can only
legally terminate grants if the grantee gives consent or fails to
comply with the terms of the grant, or the award “no longer
effectuates the program goals or agency priorities.” The new policy
also makes retroactive changes to current grants, which is only
permissible with congressional authorization, the lawsuit adds.  DOE
is the first agency after the National Institutes of Health to
announce a policy change on indirect costs. The first Trump
administration attempted to cap indirect cost rates on NIH grants at
10%, but the proposal faced bipartisan opposition in Congress, which
enacted legislation that prevents deviations from negotiated rates.

The lawsuit states that NIH’s attempted 15% cap, announced in
February, was illegal for many of the same reasons. A federal judge in
Massachusetts blocked NIH’s cap earlier this month and the agency
subsequently appealed the decision.  The plaintiffs in the DOE case
filed their lawsuit in the same court.



4/15/25: WP.  What Harvard could lose in its battle with the Trump
  administration / Trump on Tuesday threatened the school’s tax exempt
  status, and a $2.2 billion freeze on grants kicked in. Harvard
  borrowed money in anticipation of cuts.

Harvard University appeared to be bracing for federal funding cuts
before it publicly pronounced on Monday that it will not submit to the
Trump administration’s demands that it cede unprecedented control to
the government.

Last week, the school borrowed $750 million from Wall Street to shore
up its coffers. Then on Monday, just as it announced it was not
capitulating to President Donald Trump, it posted a sweeping summary
of the kinds of research innovations that are at risk if federal
officials cut grants that fund research on illnesses from cancer to
diabetes.

The Trump administration’s $2.2 billion freeze on funds to Harvard
began Monday night as a trickle of stop-work orders on major contracts
that support projects ranging from research on a deadly infection to
the effects of spaceflight on the human body. The damage assessment on
which research had been stopped was occurring throughout the day
Tuesday, with more cancellations expected.

...“All the President is asking, don’t break federal law, and then you
can have your federal funding,” White House press secretary Karoline
Leavitt said Tuesday. “I think the President is also begging a good
question … why are the American taxpayers subsidizing a university
that has billions of dollars in the bank already?”

...Harvard is the wealthiest college in the nation with a $53 billion
endowment, a collection of tax-exempt donations and investments that
pays for salaries, research, financial aid and other expenses in
perpetuity. A lot of that money, however, is restricted by donors and
cannot be easily accessed.

...The president does not have unilateral authority to revoke the
school’s tax exemption, but the IRS can eliminate it if Harvard is
found to be participating in political campaigning or lobbying.

...“It’s pure punitive lunacy. They’re just trying to bring the golden
goose of American science, technology and education pipeline to a
halt,” said Donald E. Ingber, founding director of the Wyss Institute
for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard. Late Monday night,
he received a stop-work order on two parts of a larger contract that
support about 20 employees and are collectively worth nearly $20
million.  “It goes against everything this administration talks about
with international competitiveness,” Ingber said. “We are turning away
the future workforce. The brain drain has started already.”

Comments...

If they revoke colleges’ tax except statuses for what they consider
political speech or policies, they’d better revoke the tax exempt
status of every church that preaches politics from the pulpit.

Stop pretending this has anything to do with anti-Semitism. The idea
that the administration that sent an innocent Slavadoran man off to a
foreign death camp and refuses to return him cares about the rights of
a racial minority is simply preposterous. This is about the far right
in this country finding money anywhere it can to fund ridiculous,
budget busting tax cust for the rich.

But think what they would have lost had they complied with the edicts
from the Trumpists, their honour, their reputation, their integrity
and their self-respect. Just ask the partners at Paul Weiss.

Another day, another attempt to smash some of the best things about
America. Another front in this interminable war on nothings. Another
windmill to joust. His misapplication of power truly exposes what a
weak man he really is. This fool may be President, but he'll always be
a loser.

Harvard is one of the greatest research universities in the
world. Trump is nothing but blip in history.  Harvard has been around
a long time, and will continue to thrive and long outlive Trump. The
sooner he departs this earth the better.  As an American living
abroad, I am absolutely ashamed of this moronic US president and his
foul administration. It’s obscene what is going on over there.

And why are the American taxpayers subsidizing companies owned by Elon
Musk, when he is the world’s richest person?

Bezos is worth $200B and Harvard’s endowment only worth $50B. Why
doesn’t the owner of this paper stand up to Trump??

Trump was ordered to pay $25M as a fraud settlement brought by 25
students at Trump U who paid for classes that didn't exit. TU was
shuttered in light of scandal and rampant abuse. And now president
Bevis Butthead is telling Harvard what is ethical? Screw that.


4/17/25: WP.  Trump’s freeze on $2.2 billion to Harvard provided no
  proof of wrongdoing / The Trump administration skipped over
  requirements, including offering to hold a hearing, when applying
  financial penalties related to civil rights violations.

Harvard University stands to lose billions in federal funding, but the
government’s actions against one of the world’s top research
institutions were applied with vague accusations and no proof of
specific legal violations, documents show.

...Trump administration officials have publicly said that Harvard has
violated students’ civil rights and mentioned Title VI, which is the
federal law that says any school found to violate civil rights is not
eligible for federal funding. Harvard, according to the letter the
administration sent the school on April 11, was not keeping Jewish and
pro-Israel students safe and allowed antisemitism on campus. The
letter also said the university had diversity, equity and inclusion
(DEI) programs that could not stand.

But the government’s notice did not list or explain the specific
violations that occurred at Harvard.  The administration’s action
skipped over requirements that say the government must identify and
list violations, offer a hearing, notify Congress and then wait 30
days before applying penalties.

...The Trump administration’s alleged disregard for federal procedure
is part of the basis for separate lawsuits filed by the faculty unions
at Harvard and Columbia University.  “These procedures exist because
Congress recognized that allowing federal agencies to hold funding
hostage, or to cancel it cavalierly, would give them dangerously broad
power in a system in which institutions depend so heavily upon federal
funding,” attorneys for the American Association of University
Professors wrote in the Harvard faculty union lawsuit.

...Trump has shown his willingness to punish, without detailed
explanation, institutions for their embrace of social policies with
which he disagrees.

...Universities use federal funds to, among other things, produce
cutting-edge medical research and technological advancements that make
the United States a leader in many lucrative fields.

The five-page letter to Harvard did not specify which DEI initiatives
the administration wanted eliminated, only that it must shutter all
such programs and “demonstrate that it has done so to the satisfaction
of the federal government.”  The demands, written by officials at the
Education Department, the Department of Health and Human Services, and
the General Services Administration, were relatively vague. The
administration wants the school to hire an external auditor to
evaluate the “viewpoint diversity” of the university’s students and
faculty, make “meaningful governance reform and restructuring,” and
allow for “reducing the power held by students and untenured faculty,”
the letter said.

The letter also demanded admission changes to “prevent admitting
students hostile to the American values and institutions inscribed in
the U.S. Constitution and Declaration of Independence, including
students supportive of terrorism or anti-Semitism.”

Comments...

This is where we find out if the other two branches of government will
save America from a domestic fascist dictator.

I keep forgetting, how is going after higher education institutions
going to lower my grocery prices?

Classic Trump , no sense, no process, only blind, rabid, revenge for
perceived slights. The USA is in the grip of a single person's
clinically insane ego and greed!

Take away Harvard's tax exemption? Fine. Just make sure you follow up
and remove the tax exemption for all churches and synagogues.

         [Yes, talk about institutions that discriminate against
         Jews.]

In 1933 Peter Drucker, an Austrian economist at Frankfurt University,
Germany fearful of Hitler’s plans for the country was prepared to
leave but hoped that it would not be necessary to do so. The first
Nazi-led faculty meeting at his university convinced him otherwise.
Drucker wrote down his thoughts about that meeting, 

     "Frankfurt was the first university the Nazis tackled, precisely
     because it was the most self-confidently liberal of major German
     universities, with a faculty that prided itself on its allegiance
     to scholarship, freedom of conscience, and democracy. The Nazis
     knew that control of Frankfurt University would mean control of
     German academia. And so did everyone at the university.

     "Above all, Frankfurt had a science faculty distinguished both by
     its scholarship and by its liberal convictions; and outstanding
     among the Frankfurt scientists was a biochemist-physiologist of
     Nobel-Prize caliber and impeccable liberal credentials. When the
     appointment of a Nazi commissar was announced . . . and every
     teacher and graduate assistant at the university was summoned to
     a faculty meeting to hear this new master, everybody knew that a
     trial of strength was at hand. I had never before attended a
     faculty meeting, but I did attend this one.

     "The new Nazi commissar wasted no time on the amenities. He
     immediately announced that Jews would be forbidden to enter
     university premises and would be dismissed without salary on
     March 15; this was something that no one had thought possible
     despite the Nazis’ loud antisemitism. Then he launched into a
     tirade of abuse, filth, and four-letter words such as had been
     heard rarely even in the barracks and never before in
     academia. . . . [He] pointed his finger at one department
     chairman after another and said, 'You either do what I tell you
     or we’ll put you into a concentration camp.'"

Harvard was founded in 1636. This makes it older than the United
Kingdom, 1707. Italy, 1861, and Germany, 1871. It trained many of the
leaders of the American revolution It was old when Napoleon was
born. It was 200 years old when many of its graduates fought and died
for the Union in the Civil War.  If Harvard cannot withstand the
onslaughts of this stupid little man it will be because he is
ultimately successful in destroying the entire American Democracy. And
if this happens, we will deserve it for not pushing back against the
sycophants who support him. Every student and graduate of every
university and college in the country needs to be on the phone and
e-mailing to their representatives telling them to grow spines or
resign. Remind them that they were elected to represent their
constituents in a functioning Congress, and to uphold the authority of
that Congress.

"Harvard hasn't done anything to violate its tax-exempt status.”
Brunson added: “there's not a single competent attorney left in the
Administration.”  -- One of the quotes in Heather Cox Richardson’s
newsletter this morning

Are you saying the presidential administration needs MORE that
juvenile petty petulance to remove federal funding from a
university?!!

Has everyone read the conditions trump wants on Harvard? Literally,
trump wants to control every aspect of the University from the
President, curriculum, hiring to maintenance workers.  This from the
party of small government, free speech, now wants to dictate every
aspect of your life from corporations to educational institutes. smh


Related: [4/22/25] interview on "Fresh Air" with Steven Levitsky.

    Q: The letter that the administration sent to Harvard a week ago
    Friday - that's April 11 - is a pretty remarkable letter...This is
    a part of the letter that deals with Harvard's apparent imbalance
    in viewpoint diversity - according to the administration,
    obviously - underrepresenting conservatives. But here's what the
    text of the letter says.

        "By August 25, the university shall commission an external
        party which shall satisfy the federal government as to its
        competence and good faith to audit the student body, faculty,
        staff and leadership for viewpoint diversity, such that each
        department, field or teaching unit must be individually
        viewpoint diverse. This review shall begin no later than this
        summer and shall be submitted to the university and the
        federal government by the end of the year. Harvard must
        abolish all criteria preferences and practices, whether
        mandatory or optional, throughout its admissions and hiring
        practices that function as ideological litmus tests. Every
        department or field found to lack viewpoint diversity must be
        reformed by hiring a critical mass of new faculty within that
        department or field who will provide viewpoint diversity."

     That's a pretty remarkable thing for a government to demand of a
     university, isn't it?

     A: What that passage is saying is that the government is
     demanding the right to dictate to a private university who it can
     hire and not hire and effectively what it can teach and cannot
     teach. That's the end of academic freedom. That is completely
     incompatible with a democratic society. And I know of no
     democracy that's ever permitted that sort of intervention. I know
     of many authoritarian regimes that didn't permit that level of
     federal intervention into the internal life of a university.

     ...Autocrats to the left, like Hugo Chavez, autocrats to the
     right, like Erdogan and Orban, invariably go after
     universities. And that is precisely what the Trump administration
     is doing. So there were a number of reasons why the university
     ultimately said no to the Trump administration's demand. But
     faculty are really concerned, particularly those of us who not
     only teach here, but who study authoritarianism and have seen
     these kinds of assaults elsewhere.

     Q: You know, there was some reporting over the weekend - this is
     pretty wild - that suggested that the government's letter... may
     have been sent by mistake. What do you make of this?

     A: I think that the administration blinked. I think it realized
     that this was not going well. Harvard's resistance gave a real
     burst of energy and encouragement not just to other universities,
     but to civil society across the country that's been waiting for
     the more powerful actors, the more prominent actors in our
     society, to get off the sidelines and begin to fight back. I know
     that Harvard's leadership was concerned that Harvard's public
     image is not great right now. It's viewed as very elitist and
     that there was a concern that the public would rally behind Trump
     against Harvard if there was such a conflict. That did not
     happen. To the extent that anybody rallied, the public rallied
     and was beginning to rally behind Harvard. And I think the
     administration realized that this fight was not going well and
     wanted to reset the negotiations. And I think they realized that
     they asked too much, and the danger now is that they'll come back
     and offer - or demand 60% of what they demanded before. And I
     don't know what the university's response will be.


4/18/25: IHE.  What to Know About Trump’s Strategy Targeting Colleges’
  Grants and Contracts / The novel approach is targeting billions of
  dollars for research and could reshape higher education for years to
  come.

Several agencies, including the White House and a joint task force, are
involved in freezing funds for grants and contracts to universities.

Photo illustration by Justin Morrison/Inside Higher Ed | Michael M.
Santiago/Getty Images | patrykstanisz/iStock/Getty Images

Over the course of just 13 weeks, President Donald Trump has made it
clear that he’ll use billions of dollars in federal grants and
contracts, primarily for research, as a lever to force colleges and
universities to bow to his agenda and increase the representation of
conservative ideology on their campuses.

The cuts don’t follow any typical investigative process and sometimes
lack clear explanations or legal justifications. And such an aggressive
ad hoc strategy is one that that many higher education lawyers, policy
analysts and administrators say could reshape postsecondary education
for years to come.

“It’s certainly unprecedented and deeply disturbing,” said John King
Jr., former secretary of education under President Obama and current
chancellor of the State University of New York system. Trump’s actions
“really threaten the long-standing partnership between the federal
government and higher education in the pursuit of both innovation and
economic mobility.”

Trump and his advisers have signaled their intent to crack down on
“woke” higher education but haven’t said how they will do so. Instead,
a cadre of conservative policy analysts plotted how to leverage other
agencies and sources of funding, beyond access to the $130 billion
distributed annually in federal student loans and Pell Grants.

“At the beginning it felt like I was the only one fighting,” Chris
Rufo, an influential anti-DEI advocate and a member of the Board of
Trustees at New College of Florida, said on /The Daily/, a/New York
Times /podcast last week. “Now, fast-forward five years, [and] some of
the ideas that I had cobbled together have suddenly become reality,
they’ve become policy, they affect billions of dollars in the flow of
funds.”

But efforts to send colleges and universities into “an existential
terror,” as Rufo put it, have required the Trump administration to move
at a dizzying pace and leverage multiple mechanisms that most higher
education lawyers, policy analysts and officials say are incredibly novel.

To catch up, here are four things you should know about Trump’s funding
threats to colleges and universities.

    Broad Scope of Attack

A large part of what makes the Trump administration’s current push to
crack down on colleges and align their actions with his agenda so
unprecedented, experts say, is its sheer magnitude, from the amount of
money at risk to the number of investigations involving various agencies.

The Education Department has historically taken the lead on holding
colleges accountable, leveraging institutions’ eligibility for student
aid programs to force compliance. Bu this time around, it’s an
all-hands-on-deck effort with a magazine of federal programs used as
ammunition.

At least four departments beyond Education—Justice, Defense, Energy and
Health and Human Services—have also been involved, cutting off
scientific research grants, which are typically considered immune from
political attacks.

The group launched reviews of Columbia and Harvard Universities,
demanded sweeping changes and froze $400 million and $2.2 billion in
grants and contracts, respectively. The funds at risk support a wide
range of research at the universities, including on cancer,
tuberculosis and the effects of environmental pollution on
health. Faculty have warned of dire consequences if the freezes
continue.

In addition to Columbia and Harvard, Northwestern, Cornell, Brown and
Princeton Universities have had some of their federal funds frozen,
though it’s not clear why or who made that decision and under what
legal authority. (/The Wall Street Journal/ reported that White House
staff were behind the Cornell funding freeze.)

The Trump administration also froze $175 million at the University of
Pennsylvania to penalize administrators for allowing a transgender
athlete to swim on the women’s team three years ago.

What the Trump administration is doing enters a “whole new territory,”
Princeton president Christopher Eisgruber said in a recent interview
with /The New York Times/.

Starting with the freeze at Columbia, “the government was using its
tremendous power over research dollars to try to control what a private
university was doing in terms of matters that are generally considered
part of academic freedom,” Eisgruber added. “There’s a very fundamental
threat here right now … to America’s research universities that anybody
who cares about the strength of this country, our economy, our
prosperity, our security, our health should be worried about.”

Colleges also face other threats from the federal government. The
Department of Education has launched or actively pursued at least 97
investigations concerning alleged antisemitism and DEI programs which
could imperil those institutions’ access to federal financial aid. And
the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Energy moved
to cap reimbursements for costs indirectly related to research, which,
if enacted, could cost colleges billions.

    Bypassing Standard Processes

Adding to the difficulty for colleges, the Trump administration is
largely ignoring regulatory standards and procedures when it cuts funding.

For instance, cabinet members have broadly used the term “investigation”
to describe the ways they are cracking down on colleges. But in most
cases, the review process has lasted only a few days and resulted in
little to no evidence of the alleged violation. Often, universities have
been presented with a list of ultimatums or policy changes they must
make in order to avoid a funding freeze or restore their funds.

The stop-work orders that have been issued so far have been “arbitrary”
and “often unsupported,” said King of SUNY. If there is rationale, it
often “seems disingenuous.”

And some universities have yet to receive a formal notification about a
funding freeze. For example, Brown officials have not received any
official word of a rumored $510 million cut.

“We have nothing to actually substantiate what’s being reported,” Brian
Clark, Brown’s vice president for news, told /Inside Higher Ed /in an
email.

For civil rights investigations, investigations typically begin when the
Education Department notifies an institution of the allegations made in
thorough detail, experts explained. Then, the Office for Civil Rights
conducts an in-depth investigation that includes talking to students,
faculty and staff and gathering documents or data regarding the
allegations. That process allows colleges to voluntarily resolve the
investigation and negotiate a settlement with the department. The
resulting agreement usually outlines various changes that colleges must
make to comply with federal law. Some conservative critics have said
those settlements or resolution agreements were “toothless.”

If the parties cannot agree or a college refuses to comply with the
federal law, the department could sue a college. But that’s rare, and
the Education Department has never pulled a college’s federal funding
over civil rights violations—a move that’s considered a nuclear option.

Brendan Cantwell, a higher education professor at Michigan State
University, noted that despite the quick turnaround, the
administration’s investigations do, at times, parallel the motivations
of traditional reviews. But what makes this approach so unprecedented
and unlawful, in his mind, Cantwell said, is its “unmeasured” and
“blanketed” nature.

“So while there are precedents and similar examples in the past, beyond
very superficial similarities, the similarities fall apart,” he said.

    Breaking Contract Law

The means by which Trump is terminating grants and contracts is also
novel, a lawyer who specializes in government contracts told /Inside
Higher Ed/.

Generally, the only people who have authority to take contract-based
actions on behalf of the United States are contracting officers or
agreements officers, said Jayna Marie Rust, a partner at Thompson Coburn
LLP. But under the Trump administration, it’s often unclear if this is
the case, especially with the Department of Government Efficiency
reviewing contracts and grants and touting decisions to cancel millions
in agreements.

Rust said she has not seen any of the direct communications between
government agencies and universities regarding contract/grant
termination that are due to the identity of the institution and
therefore can’t say if the notifications come from contracting or
agreements officers. But notifications coming from others is something
she has seen in other terminations that schools are receiving.

“But to the extent these communications are not coming from the
agreements officers or contracting officers, that is unusual,” Rust said.

And much like the procedure for investigating and addressing policy
violations, the government is supposed to ensure due process before
excluding schools from receiving federal funds, which is effectively
what the terminations have done. The Trump administration has
seemingly bypassed those steps. (Several faculty groups and
associations have sued to restore the canceled funding.)

Even when the administration has completed a process to determine
whether an entity can be excluded from receiving federal funds,
contracting and agreements officers also often conduct a risk analysis
to see if the benefit of letting that entity complete a contract or
grant outweighs the benefit of cutting ties (which could result in
losing the benefit of work that’s already completed), Rust said. It
appears that the Trump administration also hasn’t gone through that review.

    More Than Money at Stake

As a result of the sweeping scope of Trump’s attacks and the lack of
precedent, the risks for colleges and universities are more than
financial, higher ed experts say.

Yes, losing billions of dollars in federal funding is a problem, and not
one that elite institutions’ endowments can solve. But more than that,
what’s at risk is the core mission and ethos of American higher
education, King said.

“From the technology inside of your phone to the treatment you may
receive at your doctor—all of that can be traced back to research
conducted at America’s higher ed institutions. And it’s under threat,”
he said.

And though the dollar amounts of funding pulled from smaller private
liberal arts institutions and state universities may be “more modest,”
they’re still significant, he added. “For those researchers, it’s
heartbreaking, and it will ultimately harm economic development and
national security.”

The full impact of these funding freezes is not yet clear. But until the
courts weigh in, colleges are stuck between a rock and a hard place,
said Nussbaum, of Church Church Hittle + Antrim.

“Schools are trying to make that decision of how can we make decisions
consistent with our mission and values in a way that’s not going to get
us called out?” Nussbaum said. “I think we’ll have a little bit more
certainty on where the means and bounds of the discretion of the
executive agency is in the funding. But I think in the meantime, a lot
of schools are trying to wait out that clock.”



4/21/25: 

Date: Mon, 21 Apr 2025 15:38:57
From: FYI <fyi@aipcomm.org>
To: rwo@virginia.edu
Subject: This Week: NSF ends DEI and misinformation grants + 12
    advisory panels / Kratsios sketches S&T priorities / Trump escalates
    fight with Harvard

THE WEEK OF APRIL 21, 2025

NSF ENDS DEI AND MISINFORMATION RESEARCH GRANTS

The National Science Foundation announced last week that it is
terminating grants related to diversity, equity, and inclusion or
combating misinformation.  The decision applies to grants that involve
engaging with people based on characteristics that are protected from
discrimination under various laws, such as race, color, religion, sex,
and national origin. It also applies to research that “could be used
to infringe on the constitutionally protected speech rights of
American citizens across the United States in a manner that advances a
preferred narrative about significant matters of public debate.” NSF
stated that such grants no longer “effectuate” agency priorities,
language that has been used by the Trump administration as a legal
mechanism to terminate active awards.

NSF acknowledged in the announcement that one of the statutory goals
of its “broader impacts” grant review criteria is to increase the
participation of women and underrepresented groups in STEM, but it
nevertheless stated that NSF-funded projects may only conduct
activities to reach these groups “as part of broad engagement
activities” that are “open and available to all Americans.”  NSF also
stated it will continue to operate programs that broaden participation
based on protected characteristics if they are explicitly established
in law and “prioritized” in NSF appropriations language. Grantees may
expand STEM participation based on non-protected characteristics, such
as institutional type, geography, socioeconomic status, and career
stage, but NSF cautioned that such characteristics “cannot indirectly
preference or exclude individuals or groups based on protected
characteristics.” Furthermore, NSF stated that research with a focus
on protected characteristics is permissible when such characteristics
are “intrinsic to the research question” and the research is aligned
with agency priorities.

Reacting to the move, House Science Committee Ranking Member Zoe
Lofgren (D-CA) called on NSF to “reverse course immediately” to
protect the agency’s integrity.  “The American people deserve a
scientific enterprise free from political interference, where expert
scientists and engineers participate in a merit-based review process
to recommend the most innovative and promising research proposals,”
she stated. Lofgren also noted that Democratic staff on the committee
had just published a rebuttal to a report by Senate Commerce, Science,
and Transportation Committee Chair Ted Cruz (R-TX) that stated that
over $2 billion in NSF grants “went to questionable projects that
promoted DEI tenets or pushed onto science neo-Marxist perspectives.”

NEW OSTP DIRECTOR SKETCHES OUT S&T PRIORITIES

In a major speech last week, White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy Director Michael Kratsios said the Trump
administration will pursue novel funding methods, deregulation, and
heightened research security measures to achieve U.S. technological
preeminence. Kratsios said the U.S. should strive to be “more creative
in our use of public research and development money,” specifically
calling for greater use of “prizes, advance market commitments, and
other novel funding mechanisms, like fast and flexible grants.” He
also said deregulation is necessary to enable the construction of more
nuclear power plants and to advance transportation technologies such
as “supersonic aircraft or high-speed rail and flying cars.”

Kratsios criticized as inadequate the Biden administration’s
“small-yard, high-fence” approach to technology security, which
emphasized placing strict controls on a relatively small number of
cutting-edge technologies. He went on to call for the U.S. to
implement “strict and simple export controls and know-your-customer
rules, with an unapologetic America-first attitude about enforcing
them.” He also expressed support for tightening restrictions on
foreign scientists, saying, “To safeguard our intellectual capital, we
must restrict foreign access to sensitive data and strengthen
oversight of international collaborators.” In the portion of his
speech focused on securing research and supply chains, Kratsios
emphasized risks posed by China, referring to the country as “both a
geopolitical rival and technological competitor.”

ADVISORY PANEL TERMINATIONS REACH NSF

The National Science Foundation terminated 12 advisory committees last
week, joining a growing list of science agencies that have culled
committees in response to a February executive order from President
Donald Trump aiming to reduce the size of the federal government. NSF
dissolved the advisory committees for its Directorates of Mathematical
and Physical Sciences, Geosciences, and STEM Education, among
others. Five NSF advisory committees will continue to meet as they are
required in statute, including one for the new Technology, Innovation,
and Partnerships Directorate, which will hold its inaugural meeting on
April 28. The other four surviving panels are the Astronomy and
Astrophysics Advisory Committee, the Committee on Equal Opportunities
in Science and Engineering, and the panels involved in reviewing
nominations for the National Medal of Science and NSF’s Alan
T. Waterman Award.

TRUMP ADMINISTRATION ESCALATES FIGHT WITH HARVARD

The Trump administration put $2.2 billion of Harvard University’s
research funding on hold last week after the institution rejected a
series of demands laid out in an April 11 letter signed by three
federal officials on the administration’s Joint Task Force to Combat
Anti-Semitism. Those demands extend well beyond anti-semitism
measures, such as a requirement that Harvard audit its students,
faculty, and staff for “viewpoint diversity.” In announcing the
funding freeze, the task force stated that Harvard’s refusal to comply
with the demands “reinforces the troubling entitlement mindset that is
endemic in our nation’s most prestigious universities and colleges –
that federal investment does not come with the responsibility to
uphold civil rights laws.” Harvard has accused the government of
overreaching, stating it will “not surrender its independence or
relinquish its constitutional rights.” Meanwhile, President Donald
Trump has also threatened to revoke Harvard’s tax-exempt status, and
the Department of Homeland Security has threatened to limit its
ability to enroll foreign students. In addition, foreign donations to
the university are being scrutinized by the Department of Education,
building on probes begun during the first Trump administration.

EVENT TO EXPLORE TRAJECTORY OF SCIENCE POLICY UNDER TRUMP

The upheaval in science policy to date under the new Trump administration will
be explored in a webinar this Wednesday afternoon hosted by the magazine Issues
in Science and Technology. The panelists are Caroline Wagner of Ohio State
University, Carrie Wolinetz of Lewis-Burke Associates, Divyansh Kaushik of
Beacon Global Strategies, and Jason Rittenberg of Excel Regional Solutions. FYI
Director Mitch Ambrose will moderate the conversation.


4/24/25: 

Date: Thu, 24 Apr 2025 16:33:03
From: FYI <fyi@aipcomm.org>
Subject: US Physics Departments Expect to Shrink Graduate Programs

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN

US Physics Departments Expect to Shrink Graduate Programs
Clare Zhang

Student enrollment and guaranteed financial support are expected to fall amid
anticipation of federal budget cuts, a new report finds.

   Many U.S. graduate programs in physics and astronomy are expecting
   lower enrollment in the next two classes of first-year students,
   according to a report published yesterday by the American Institute
   of Physics that assesses the impacts of uncertainty about the
   future of federal science funding and policy under the Trump
   administration.

   AIP contacted all 292 department chairs at schools offering
   graduate degrees in physics and astronomy in the U.S. and received
   115 replies during the response window between April 3 and 16.

   The report anticipates that first-year enrollment in physics and
   astronomy graduate programs could decline by about 13% this
   fall. This includes a 25% decline at private institutions and a 7%
   decline at public institutions. Those values are derived from
   respondents’ estimates of how many more or fewer first-year
   students they expect at their own institutions in 2025 compared to
   2024. Many department chairs said they believe the decline in
   first-year students will be even larger in the fall of 2026.

   “It is almost certain we will have to shrink the size of our
   graduate program in future years due to the anticipated reduction
   in federal funding,” one respondent wrote. “Faculty will have to
   get more adept at pursuing non-federal sources, but that is
   unlikely to cover the gap. Faculty and students alike are all very
   concerned, and I suspect some students will start to leave the
   program prematurely if they perceive academia/national labs as an
   increasingly nonviable path for the future.”

   Although only three respondents said they have rescinded at least
   one offer of enrollment, several said their university
   administration did not allow them to make follow-up offers when an
   offer was declined. Others reported that their departments have
   limited their funding offers to only cover the first year of study
   or have removed language that commits to providing funding.

   In addition, 18% of departments reported that at least one of their
   faculty members had federal funding terminated or reduced, and another
   28% expected such news in the next six months.

EMOTIONAL TOLL

   Several department chairs described a climate of intense stress and
   decreased morale among faculty and students. One respondent
   characterized the effects so far as “mostly psychological,” as
   researchers anticipate cuts to grants and indirect cost rates that
   they believe will eliminate staff, leave scientific infrastructure
   to deteriorate, and set back young scientists’ careers.  “One
   cannot work like this – all energy goes in thinking how to survive
   and not think in physics – it is like being in the war,” another
   department chair wrote.  “No one can be productive in climate like
   this – It is the end of the US scientific and technical dominance
   in the world – we will not recover from this in a decade,” they
   added.

   The funding uncertainty has also led to faculty and staff hiring
   freezes. One respondent expressed concern that their institution
   would be unable to replace retiring faculty in the long term.

   Many department chairs also expressed concern regarding the Trump
   administration’s border policies and their impacts on foreign
   researchers and international travel. One respondent said
   undergraduate students at their university have had their visas
   revoked, and another said they have witnessed a “chilling effect”
   on foreign postdocs and students. News outlets have reported cases
   of student arrests or deportations following revoked visas.  One
   respondent wrote that graduate students are now more interested in
   searching for positions abroad, while another said some scientists
   are leaving the country because of the unpredictable and hostile
   environment.

   Traveling researchers often discuss what to delete from their
   phones and consider using burners, another respondent said, adding
   that British and Canadian researchers avoided their most recent
   meeting. A French scientist garnered attention in March after being
   denied U.S. entry on his way to a conference, and last week the
   Canadian Association of University Teachers issued travel guidance
   warning its members against non-essential travel to the U.S.


4/25/25:  

Date: Fri, 25 Apr 2025 07:33:58
From: Van Scoyoc Associates <kmorrison@vsadc.com>
Subject: Washington Week in Science - April 25, 2025

A Weekly Update of Science Policy News and Select Funding Opportunities

NIH grants plummeted $2.3 billion in Trump’s first months, as federal-academia
partnership crumbles 

    The National Institutes of Health has scaled back its awards of
    new grants by at least $2.3 billion since the beginning of the
    year, with the biggest shortfalls hitting the study of infectious
    diseases, heart and lung ailments, and basic research into
    fundamental biological systems, a new STAT analysis has
    found. This roughly 28% contraction in funding comes on top of
    threats to freeze billions of dollars of NIH funding to specific
    universities as well as abrupt terminations to hundreds of
    research projects on Covid-19, HIV/AIDS, health disparities,
    vaccine hesitancy, and other areas targeted by President Trump’s
    political agenda. Read more:  STAT News


No NIH grants for colleges with DEI programs or Israel boycotts 

    If colleges and universities want to receive funding from NIH,
    they’ll have to certify they don’t operate any diversity, equity,
    and inclusion or accessibility programs that violate federal
    antidiscrimination laws, under a new NIH policy announced
    Monday. The new policy also bars colleges from boycotting Israel
    or Israeli businesses if they want to receive NIH grants. Read
    more:  Inside Higher Ed


NIH guts its first and largest study centered on women 

    President Donald Trump’s administration appears to be killing
    much, if not all, of a historic initiative that was the first, and
    is still the largest, National Institutes of Health (NIH) effort
    centered on the health needs of women. The Women’s Health
    Initiative (WHI) has enrolled tens of thousands of participants in
    clinical trials of hormones and other medications and tracked the
    health of many thousands more over more than 3 decades. Its
    findings have had a major influence on health care. WHI
    leaders announced yesterday that contracts supporting its regional
    centers are being terminated in September and that the study’s
    clinical coordinating center, based at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
    Center, “will continue operations until January 2026, after which
    time its funding remains uncertain.”  Read more:  Science


RFK Jr. eyes reversing CDC’s Covid-19 vaccine recommendation for children 

    HHS Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. is weighing pulling the
    Covid-19 vaccine from the government’s list of recommended
    immunizations for children, two people familiar with the
    discussions told POLITICO. The directive under consideration would
    remove the Covid shot from the childhood vaccine schedule
    maintained by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
    widely used by physicians to guide vaccine distribution, marking
    Kennedy’s most significant move yet to shake up the nation’s
    vaccination practices. Read more:  Politico

 
House oversight Democrat demands answers on gutting of CDC public records office

    The top Democrat on the House Committee on Oversight and
    Accountability wants answers from the Centers for Disease Control
    and Prevention about why its public records staff was gutted on
    April 1, when thousands of federal health agency workers were
    fired. Rep. Gerry Connolly, a Democrat from Virginia, sent a
    letter to CDC's acting director Dr. Susan Monarez on Thursday,
    expressing "concern" about the 22 staffers who handled and
    fulfilled public records requests being placed on administrative
    leave until their jobs are eliminated on June 2. Read more:  NPR  

FDA milk quality program suspended after job cuts

     The Food and Drug Administration is suspending a quality control
     program for testing milk and other dairy products due to a size
     reduction in its food safety and nutrition division. According
     to Reuters, an internal email from the FDA’s Division of Dairy
     Safety stated the agency was suspending its proficiency testing
     program for Grade “A” raw milk and finished products effective
     Monday. Read more:  NewsNation

Trump administration cancels top NASA climate lab’s lease at Columbia University

     The Trump administration canceled the lease for its top climate
     monitoring lab, located in New York City, as of May 31, according
     to an email seen by CNN. In the email, the director of the NASA
     Goddard Spaceflight Center in Maryland informed employees of the
     impending closure of the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies
     and transitioning to remote work. Read more:  CNN

 
Bipartisan caucus criticizes proposed NASA science budget cuts 

     The bipartisan co-chairs of the Congressional Planetary Science
     Caucus have criticized the proposed cuts in NASA’s science
     programs, marking the first Republican opposition in Congress to
     the plans. In an April 15 statement, Reps. Judy Chu (D-CA) and
     Don Bacon (R-NE) said they were “extremely alarmed” by reports
     that the draft budget proposal for fiscal year 2026 would cut
     NASA’s science budget in half. Read more:  Space News

 
Trump-appointed National Science Foundation leader resigns 

     National Science Foundation Director Sethuraman Panchanathan
     abruptly resigned Thursday afternoon, more than a year before the
     end of his term. “I believe that I have done all I can to advance
     the mission of the agency and feel that it is time for me to pass
     the baton to new leadership,” Panchanathan said in an all-staff
     memo obtained by POLITICO’s E&E News. Read more:  Politico

NSF ends DEI and misinformation research grants 

     The National Science Foundation announced  last week it is
     terminating grants related to diversity, equity, and inclusion or
     combating misinformation. The decision applies to grants that
     involve engaging with people based on characteristics that are
     protected from discrimination under various laws, such as race,
     color, religion, sex, and national origin. It also applies to
     research that “could be used to infringe on the constitutionally
     protected speech rights of American citizens across the United
     States in a manner that advances a preferred narrative about
     significant matters of public debate.” NSF stated that such
     grants no longer “effectuate” agency priorities, language that
     has been used by the Trump administration as a legal
     mechanism  to terminate active awards. Read more:  AIP


4/25/25:  From FYI:

     ...DOGE stated that NSF canceled 402 “wasteful DEI grants” in a
     post on X last Friday, the day of NSF’s announcement. The New
     York Times reported that the list of terminated grants totaled
     over 400 and a crowdsourced list includes hundreds.  Based on the
     crowdsourced list, the divisions with the most grant cuts
     currently include Research on Learning in Formal and Informal
     Settings, Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences, Computer and Network
     Systems, Engineering Education and Centers, and Equity for
     Excellence in STEM.

     ...The announcement also notes that the grant terminations are
     not limited to, DEI and misinformation. The administration has
     targeted climate research grants at other agencies based on a
     January executive order.

     ...NSF has been particularly involved in funding diversity,
     equity, and inclusion efforts through its “broader impacts” grant
     review criterion, which assesses a project’s potential to benefit
     society based on seven goals, including expanding participation
     of women and individuals from underrepresented groups in STEM.
     Those goals are defined by a legal statute that cannot be removed
     or altered without action by Congress.

     The agency acknowledged this goal in its announcement but
     indicated that it will no longer fund activities to only engage
     with these groups. Rather, these activities may only be conducted
     “as part of broad engagement activities” that are “open and
     available to all Americans,” the announcement
     states. Furthermore, grantees may expand STEM participation based
     on non-protected characteristics, such as institutional type,
     geography, socioeconomic status, and career stage, but NSF
     cautioned that such activities “cannot indirectly preference or
     exclude individuals or groups based on protected
     characteristics.”

     “Projects that aim to create more opportunities for more people
     in every region of the country to participate in science and
     technology remain an important part of NSF’s mission,” the agency
     stated.


4/25/25:

Home <https://www.insidehighered.com/>

  NSF Director Resigns

By  Kathryn Palmer <https://www.insidehighered.com/author/kathryn-palmer>

Sethuraman Panchanathan, director of the National Science Foundation,
resigned Thursday after nearly five years at the helm. His resignation
comes less than one week after he issued sweeping priority changes
—including terminating funding for projects that focus on diversity,
equity and inclusion or combating misinformation—at the independent
agency that funds billions of dollars to nonmedical university
research each year.

“I believe that I have done all I can to advance the mission of the
agency and feel that it is time to pass the baton to new leadership,”
Panchanathan wrote in a resignation letter, first reported by
/Science/.  “I am deeply grateful to the presidents for the opportunity
to serve our nation.”

Although it’s not immediately clear what prompted his resignation,
Panchanathan is among the latest top federal officials who have
resigned since President Trump started his second term in January. The
administration has also fired thousands of other federal employees,
including dozens at the NSF, and terminated many grants that don’t
align with the agency’s new anti-DEI priorities. Additionally,
Republican senator Ted Cruz of Texas has been targeting the agency for
months calling it a bastion of “a far-left ideology.”

According to /Science/, even more changes are coming to the NSF. The
Department of Government Efficiency reportedly told Panchanathan
earlier this month to plan to fire half the NSF’s 1,700-person staff;
the Office of Management and Budget reportedly told him that Trump
only plans to request 55 percent of the agency’s $9 billion budget for
fiscal year 2026.

“While NSF has always been an efficient agency,” he wrote in his
resignation letter, “we still took [on] the challenge of identifying
other possible efficiencies and reducing our commitments to serve the
scientific community even better.”

Trump picked Panchanathan, a computer scientist from India who
previously worked as a top research administrator at Arizona State
University, to run the agency during his first term in office. But soon
after Panchanathan started his six-year term in 2020, voters rejected
Trump’s bid for re-election, and most of Panchanathan’s work at the NSF
happened under former president Joe Biden’s administration. 

Under Panchanathan’s leadership, the NSF’s stated priorities have
included increasing diversity in the STEM workforce, forming industry
partnerships, job creation and broadening research opportunities for
smaller universities and community colleges. In 2022, Panchanathan
oversaw the creation of the NSF’s Directorate for Technology, Innovation
and Partnerships, which is focused on “accelerating breakthrough
technologies, transitioning these technologies to the market, and
preparing Americans for better-quality, higher-wage jobs,” according to
the NSF’s website <https://www.nsf.gov/tip/latest>. 

Despite the second Trump administration’s quick and radical changes to
some of those Biden-era policies, Panchanathan was seemingly adapting—up
until his resignation Thursday—while many other scientists sound the
alarm that Trump's policies will hurt research and innovation. 

In his statement on the NSF’s reoriented priorities last Friday, he said
that any NSF-funded activities in support of “broadening participation”
in STEM “must aim to create opportunities for all Americans everywhere”
and “not preference some groups at the expense of others, or
directly/indirectly exclude individuals or groups.”


4/25/25:

From: "Patterson, Ricky (rjp0i)" <ricky@virginia.edu>
To: "Majewski, Steven R (srm4n)" <srm4n@virginia.edu>,
    "astro-faculty@virginia.edu" <astro-faculty@virginia.edu>
Subject: Re: [astro-faculty] NSF hoax?

With the chaos surrounding other agencies, and the abrupt resignation
of the NSF Director yesterday just ahead of a promised/threatened 50%
staff cuts and 55% funding cuts for NSF, I think that it would be
prudent to be sure that you have copies of all of your grant ͏related
documentation downloaded from Research.gov.

͏However, some of the first people that raised the alarm yesterday
about Research.gov going down with loss of data expected have now
updated their messaging to say that they now believe these fears to be
not well-founded.

https://bsky.app/profile/jeremymberg.bsky.social/post/3lnnlwivq4227 [bsky.app]

 (here is the original post from yesterday at 5pm:
https://bsky.app/profile/jeremymberg.bsky.social/post/3lnlmlvf23s23 [bsky.app])

Hope this is helpful (as we’ve all been reduced to a reliance on
rumors to stay ahead of potential purges)


4/25/25:  

From: Astronomy Department Chairs <Astro-Chairs@virginia.edu>
To: Faculty Department <astro-faculty@virginia.edu>,
    "astro-staff@virginia.edu" <astro-staff@virginia.edu>
Subject: [astro-faculty] American Institute of Physics Survey

Earlier this month the AIP’s Research Team conducted a brief survey to
help them better understand the impact of recent federal funding
decisions on physics and astronomy ͏departments.

They have just published a report highlighting our findings. Here is a
link to thereport: htt> n-physics-and-astronomy-graduate-programs
[ww2.aip.org]

They found that: 

• More than a third of the responding departments expect to enroll
fewer first-year graduate students for the Fall 2025 semester. Many
told them that the situation was still fluid when they contacted them.

• The expected total decline is around 13%, or about 600 first-year
students. Many believe the decline will be even larger for the Fall
2026 semester.

• Almost half of the departments responding had experienced either
lost or reduced federal funding (18%) or anticipated losing funding
within the next six months (28%).

• Departments at private institutions are more likely to have
experienced or anticipate a loss or reduction of funding.

• When the AIP asked, very few departments had rescinded offers of
graduate school acceptance. Many described making offers for only one
year of funding or writing the offers so that rescission would be
easier.

I’m very glad that we were among the Astronomy Department to have
maintained our traditional graduate class size, and that we did not
alter our standard admissions offers or protocols.  We were able to do
this in confidence in part because of the support we had been assured
by the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences.

Unfortunately, the overall situation does impact the prospects for our
undergraduate majors, and this means we must redouble our efforts to
be straightforward in our discussions about the realities of the field
and to provide viable counsel and mentorship in the countless
rewarding and remunerative career pathways that our degree programs
afford. 
 
Steve


4/28/25:  FYI

MORE GRANT TERMINATIONS, DEFERRED RESIGNATION OFFERS AT NSF

The National Science Foundation announced a second round of grant
terminations last Friday, stating [aip.us17.list-manage.com] the
decision reflected the agency’s “commitment to funding research
opportunities for all Americans everywhere.” The first round
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] came a week earlier, eliminating over 400
active grants, according to the Department of Government Efficiency. A
crowdsourced database [aip.us17.list-manage.com] of NSF grant
terminations over the last two weeks currently includes over 500
grants, the largest share of which falls under the STEM Education
directorate. Members of the union representing NSF issued an open
letter [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to scientific societies asking them
to mobilize their members to reach out to local media outlets, contact
their members of Congress, post on social media, and more “to mitigate
the unfolding crisis and the threat to the long-term viability of
NSF.”

NSF also re-offered deferred resignation plans to its employees
following the resignation of agency director Sethuraman Panchanathan
last Thursday. Employees must apply by the end of the day on May 8,
and those who do will be placed on administrative leave by May 23. The
memo, reviewed by FYI, “encourages” all NSF employees to consider
accepting the deferred resignation agreement “in light of future
restructuring, staffing reductions, and constrained budget
environments.”  It adds that reduced leadership positions,
“standardization across directorates and increased centralization,”
and the possibility of “significant workforce reductions” are expected
in the coming months.


4/30/25:  Watched several presentations at an open session of the
NAS Board on Physics and Astronomy.  From the DOE, NSF, and NASA
Astrophysics.

They were strictly on the accomplishments of the agencies over
the last year or so.  There was no reference to the incredible
cuts the Trump administration has already made or those it
intends to make.  And none of the questioners (in the room or
online) raised the issue either.  

The NASA presenter started with about 5 minutes on the Roman
mission.  

The DOE presenter went out of her way to praise the new Trump
appointee to the leadership of DOE.  

Of course, the unprecedented attack of science by Trump may
have been a hot topic in the executive sessions.  

DOE made a big pitch for its active development of AI in high-end
computer simulations.  3 of the 6 topics illustrated were
astronomical(!)


4/30/25: ArsTechnica.  RFK Jr. rejects cornerstone of health science:
  Germ theory / In his 2021 book vilifying Anthony Fauci, RFK Jr. lays
  out support for an alternate theory.

[Jesus Christ!]

...The trouble is that now that Kennedy is the country's top health
official, his warped ideas are contributing to the rise of a dystopian
reality. Federal health agencies are spiraling into chaos, and
critical public health services for Americans have been brutally
slashed, dismantled, or knee-capped—from infectious disease responses,
the lead poisoning team, and Meals on Wheels to maternal health
programs and anti-smoking initiatives, just to name a few. The health
of the nation is at stake; the struggle to understand what goes on in
Kennedy's head is vital.

While we may never have definitive answers on his cognitive situation,
one thing is plain: Kennedy's thoughts and actions make a lot more
sense when you realize he doesn't believe in a foundational scientific
principle: germ theory.

Germ theory is, of course, the 19th-century proven idea that
microscopic germs—pathogenic viruses, bacteria, parasites, and
fungi—cause disease. It supplanted the leading explanation of disease
at the time, the miasma theory, which suggests that diseases are
caused by miasma, that is, noxious mists and vapors, or simply bad air
arising from decaying matter, such as corpses, sewage, or rotting
vegetables.

Germ theory also knocks back a lesser-known idea called the terrain
theory, which we've covered before. This is a somewhat ill-defined
theory that generally suggests diseases stem from imbalances in the
internal "terrain" of the body, such as malnutrition or the presence
of toxic substances. The theory is linked to ideas by French scientist
Antoine Béchamp and French physiologist Claude Bernard.  Béchamp,
considered a bitter crank and rival to famed French microbiologist
Louis Pasteur, is perhaps best known for wrongly suggesting the basic
unit of organisms is not the cell, but nonexistent microanatomical
elements he called "microzyma."

...It's important to note here that our understanding of Kennedy's
disbelief in germ theory isn't based on speculation or deduction; it's
based on Kennedy's own words. He wrote an entire section on it in his
2021 book vilifying Fauci, titled The Real Anthony Fauci. The section
is titled "Miasma vs. Germ Theory," in the chapter "The White Man's
Burden."

In the chapter, Kennedy promotes the "miasma theory" but gets the
definition completely wrong. Instead of actual miasma theory, he
describes something more like terrain theory. He writes: "'Miasma
theory' emphasizes preventing disease by fortifying the immune system
through nutrition and by reducing exposures to environmental toxins
and stresses."  Kennedy contrasts his erroneous take on miasma theory
with germ theory, which he derides as a tool of the pharmaceutical
industry and pushy scientists to justify selling modern medicines. The
abandonment of miasma theory, Kennedy bemoans, realigned health and
medical institutions to "the pharmaceutical paradigm that emphasized
targeting particular germs with specific drugs rather than fortifying
the immune system through healthy living, clean water, and good
nutrition."

According to Kennedy, germ theory gained popularity, not because of
the undisputed evidence supporting it, but by "mimicking the
traditional explanation for disease—demon possession—giving it a leg
up over miasma."  To this day, Kennedy writes, a "$1 trillion
pharmaceutical industry pushing patented pills, powders, pricks,
potions, and poisons, and the powerful professions of virology and
vaccinology led by 'Little Napoleon' himself, Anthony Fauci, fortify
the century-old predominance of germ theory."

In all, the chapter provides a clear explanation of why Kennedy
relentlessly attacks evidence-based medicines; vilifies the
pharmaceutical industry; suggests HIV doesn't cause AIDS and
antidepressants are behind mass shootings; believes that vaccines are
harmful, not protective; claims 5G wireless networks cause cancer;
suggests chemicals in water are changing children's gender identities;
and is quick to promote supplements to prevent and treat diseases,
such as recently recommending vitamin A for measles and falsely
claiming children who die from the viral infection are malnourished.

..."It's so unbelievable, because you can't imagine that someone who's
the head of Health and Human Services doesn't believe that specific
viruses or bacteria cause specific diseases, and that the prevention
or treatment of them is lifesaving."  [Paul Offit]

..."He holds these beliefs like a religious conviction," Offit
said. "There is no shaking him from that," regardless of how much
evidence there is to prove him wrong. "If you're trying to talk him
out of something that he holds with a religious conviction—that's
never going to happen. And so any time anybody disagrees with him, he
goes, 'Well, of course, they're just in the pocket of industry; that's
why they say that.'"

Comments...

The whole foundation of the religious fools and ignorant zealots
powering the conservative machine is a denial of fundamental
reality. They firmly and adamantly believe that their superstition and
ignorance are not simply equivalent to knowledge but superior to it.
They're a blight on humanity and have been all along.

I would once again like to thank Senate Republicans for inflicting
this known moron on the rest of us. I hope you're happy.
 
OK, fine.  Here's a small (really small) sample of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Let's just rub that into that little abrasion on your leg
and wait a couple of days. Stay away from bad air or whatever else you
like.  We'll watch.

Sometimes it is not the political populism that angers me, but the
celebration of sheer incompetence that comes with this government. I
understand that the political pendulum swings back and forth between
traditional and more forward-looking ideologies. But the thing we have
here is just incompetence and stupidity. And it does a lot of damage
to real people.

It's so freaking rich that a huge part of the Trump 2.0/MAGA2025 grift
was "restoring meritocracy to government", only for them to fill the
bureaucracy to the brim with meritless brain worm infected clowns like
RFK Jr.



4/30/25: virginiabusiness.com.  DOJ demands University of Virginia
    prove it’s dismantling DEI

Leaked April letter came one day before U.Va. board vote

*Kate Andrews* <https://virginiabusiness.com/author/kandrews/>	
//April 30, 2025//**

*SUMMARY:*

  * U.S. Department of Justice
    <https://virginiabusiness.com/blog/tag/department-of-justice/> sent
    letter to U.Va. <https://virginiabusiness.com/blog/tag/u-va/>
    administration calling for university to produce report it has
    dismantled and dissolved DEI
    <https://virginiabusiness.com/blog/tag/dei/> initiatives
  * DOJ’s Civil Rights Division gives school a May 2 deadline
  * U.Va. Board of Visitors
    <https://virginiabusiness.com/blog/tag/board-of-visitors/> voted to
    dissolve DEI office March 7
  * DOJ letter says it has received complaints that U.Va. has not made
    30-day report public and possibly has not taken action on board’s
    mandate

The University of Virginia‘s president, rector and university legal
counsel received a letter Monday from the U.S. Department of Justice’s
Civil Rights Division calling for the university to produce audio and
video from a closed session of its board of visitors last month, as
well as show evidence that every division of the university and its
health system has dissolved and dismantled its diversity, equity and
inclusion initiatives, following a board vote in March.

The DOJ’s letter, dated April 28, says its civil rights office has
received complaints that U.Va.’s administration has not made public a
required 30-day report on its progress in ending DEI operations
throughout the university, and alleges that U.Va. “may have failed to
implement these directives.” The letter gives U.Va. President Jim Ryan,
the university’s rector and legal counsel a May 2 deadline to update the
Justice Department’s civil rights office on its progress.

Arriving one day before a Tuesday special meeting of the BOV, during
which members voted on a second DEI-related resolution, the letter was
signed by Harmeet K. Dhillon, the newly appointed assistant attorney
general for the DOJ’s civil rights division and a U.Va. law school alum,
as well as Deputy Assistant Attorney General Gregory W. Brown and senior
counsel Jeffrey Morrison.

According to the letter, the DOJ issued letters to U.Va.’s
undergraduate institution and its law school on April 11 and April 18
regarding admissions practices, “particularly regarding racial
preferences” after the U.S. Supreme Court’s 2023 ruling to strike down
affirmative action policies in college admissions, as well as
executive orders issued by President Donald Trump to dismantle DEI
“apparatuses and instruments of discrimination based on race, skin
color, ethnicity, national origin and other impermissible, immutable
characteristics.”

The letter issues a May 2 deadline for the university to produce the
official BOV resolution from March 7, “along with all written or
electronic records (including audio or video recording) of the … public
and closed session meeting and deliberations,” as well as certification
that the resolution’s dictates are being enacted at every part of the
university, including the UVA Health system and all of U.Va.’s
undergraduate, graduate and professional programs and schools.

The letter also calls for “all reports submitted by you or members of
your administration” to the board and the rector from around April 7
regarding the execution of DEI dissolution at U.Va.

“Per the directives of the Board of Visitors and that unanimous [March
7] resolution, your office and you were required to report to the Board
of Visitors within thirty days, confirming the total elimination of DEI
at the University of Virginia,” the letter says, adding that the civil
rights department has “received complaints that your office and the
university may have failed to implement these directives and further
that you have refused to produce the report on the matter.”

The DOJ letter was made public on the C’ville Bubble account
<https://x.com/CvilleBubble/status/1917059868197872013> on X Monday, the
day before U.Va.’s board met in a special session in part to discuss
progress on the dissolution of U.Va.’s DEI office and other DEI initiatives.

Also on Monday, The Jefferson Council, a group of conservative U.Va.
alumni who have been critical of the university’s leadership
particularly over pro-Palestine student protests, claims of
antisemitism and free speech issues, posted Ryan speaking in an
undated video about the board’s then-upcoming March 7 vote. According
to the Jefferson Council’s post, Ryan was addressing the U.Va. Faculty
Senate about the DEI resolution.

“The board would like to talk to us about that update,” Ryan says in the
one-minute video. “I will say I’m optimistic we’re going to end up in a
good place.”

However, the council alleges that “multiple Jefferson Council
researchers and allies have had their FOIA requests for the 30-day DEI
report denied — a stonewalling that The Cavalier Daily independently
encountered as well.”

On Tuesday, board members met at the Boar’s Head Resort off campus and
voted for a resolution that says in part that “the University of
Virginia has made progress on implementing the directives of the Board
of Visitors’ March 7 resolution on diversity, equity and inclusion,
and additional work remains to be done to ensure and advance open
inquiry at the university and to best prepare students to become
citizen-leaders ready to serve our community.”

The resolution also rescinds a September 2020 resolution that “endorsed
pursuit of numerical goals for the composition of students and faculty,”
a policy that called for U.Va. to hire more faculty from
underrepresented racial and ethnic groups, as well as more women in
certain fields, and to aim to diversify its student body as well.

Moreover, the April 29 resolution calls for the president, interim
provost and an appointee of the U.Va. Faculty Senate to report to the
board at its next meeting in June on “work being done to ensure an
intellectual climate and campus culture where all students, faculty and
staff are able to express politically diverse views, engage in
constructive discussion across differences, and respond to competing
perspectives in good faith.”

Ryan was among more than 550 university and college presidents and
other higher education leaders who signed an American Association of
Colleges and Universities letter issued April 22 that condemned what
they call the Trump White House’s “unprecedented government overreach
and political interference,” including threatening to pull approved
federal funding for university research and revoking international
students’ visas or terminating their legal statuses.

Of the six Virginia presidents who signed the letter, Ryan was the only
head of a public university to do so.

U.Va. and the DOJ’s Civil Rights Division did not immediately respond to
requests for comment Wednesday.


4/30/25: Nature.  Trump team’s science cuts threaten tenure hopes for
early-career academics / As funding dries up, US universities will need
to reconsider traditional tenure requirements.

...Johnson’s not alone. For other early-career researchers who spoke
to Nature, the path to meeting standard tenure expectations now seems
blocked, and they are looking to their universities for guidance on
how to proceed. Since Trump began his presidency, US agencies such as
the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) that fund science have been slashing research awards that
don’t align with the administration’s political ideology. They’ve also
been freezing grants to universities with DEI programmes, or that the
administration says have failed to protect their students from
antisemitism. (Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
yesterday released reports initiated in 2024 by internal task forces
that found evidence of this type of discrimination — as well as
discrimination against Muslim and Arab students — and has pledged
reform.)

These and other actions by the Trump team have left many researchers
in limbo, waiting for funding that might never arrive, or scrambling
to find other sources of financial support, to keep their teams
intact.

Annika Barber, a molecular biologist at Rutgers University in New
Brunswick, New Jersey, says that for many laboratories, including
hers, even a three- to six-month gap in funding means that people have
to be fired.

...Possibilities under consideration include bridge funding — whereby
a university provides temporary financing until a long-term solution
is found — and modifying the requirements of tenure. The group hasn’t
yet made any specific requests of Rutgers, but Barber says its members
think that tenure extensions — giving researchers more time to meet
requirements — won’t work in this situation, because there’s no
guarantee that funding will ever be restored.

Johnson agrees that a tenure-clock extension probably won’t solve the
problem. “I don’t know how we could still meet the tenure
requirements” if US science budgets continue to be targeted, she
says. Media outlets have reported that Trump will be requesting a
reduction of about 40% in the NIH’s spending for fiscal year 2026, for
example.

...Even with university support, researchers are getting creative about
funding their work. Quinnehtukqut McLamore, a social psychologist in
their first year as a faculty member at the University of Missouri in
Columbia, sees no way to secure federal funding in time for a tenure
review. They spent months developing a study in response to an August
call for proposals from the NSF for research that supports LGBT+
people in science. But McLamore abandoned the effort after Trump took
office in January and signed anti-LGBT+ policies, including one that
recognizes only two sexes, male and female.

...They warn that tenure itself is under threat — and therefore might
not be a goal to work towards any more. Members of Trump’s Republican
Party have been trying to weaken tenure for years, suggesting that it
protects poorly performing academic workers from dismissal. Two
Republican-controlled states, Kentucky and Ohio, passed legislation in
March making it easier to fire tenured professors at public
universities; other Republican-led states, including Nebraska and
North Dakota, are considering similar bills.


   
                          MAY


5/1/25: Nature.  Exclusive: NSF stops awarding new grants and funding
existing ones / US science funder also plans to screen grant
applications for compliance with ‘agency priorities’.

Staff members at the US National Science Foundation (NSF) were told on
30 April to “stop awarding all funding actions until further notice,”
according to an email seen by Nature.  The policy prevents the NSF,
one of the world’s biggest supporters of basic research, from awarding
new research grants and from supplying allotted funds for existing
grants, such as those that receive yearly increments of money. The
email does not provide a reason for the freeze and says that it will
last “until further notice”

Earlier this week, NSF leadership also introduced a new policy
directing staff members to screen grant proposals for “topics or
activities that may not be in alignment with agency
priorities”. Proposals judged not “in alignment” must be returned to
the applicants by NSF employees. The policy has not been made public
but was described in documents seen by Nature.

An NSF staff member says that although good science can still be
funded, the policy has the potential to be “Orwellian
overreach”. Another staff member says, “They are butchering the gold
standard merit review process that was established at NSF over
decades”. One program officer says they are resigning because of the
policy. Nature spoke with five NSF staffers for this story, all on the
condition of anonymity because they are not authorized to speak to the
media.

The changes are hitting an agency already in crisis. In the past two
weeks, the NSF has terminated roughly 1,040 grants that would have
awarded US$739 million to researchers and their institutions. The
agency’s director, Sethuraman Panchanathan, resigned last month.

...Funding for the NSF, as for all other federal agencies, is set by
the US Congress. To date, the agency has received only about
one-quarter of the funding that Congress appropriated to it for the
current fiscal year, which ends on 30 September.

It is not clear whether a funding shortfall is driving the latest
grant freeze. But Matthew Lawrence, a specialist in administrative law
at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, says that under a 1974 law
called the Impoundment Control Act, the NSF must give Congress special
notice of the grant halt, which would otherwise be unlawful.

Cuts to NSF spending this year could be a prelude to a dramatically
reduced budget next year. Science previously reported that US
President Donald Trump will request a $4 billion budget for the agency
in fiscal year 2026, a 55% reduction from what Congress appropriated
for 2025. Similarly, the proposed 2026 budget for the National
Institutes of Health calls for a 44% cut to the agency’s $47 billion
budget in 2025, according to documents leaked to the media. During
Trump’s first term, Republicans in Congress rejected many of the
president’s requested cuts to science funding, but it is not clear
that they will do so again.

In the long term, severe reductions to science funding could damage
the economy, according to new research. A report by economists at
American University in Washington DC estimates that a 50% reduction in
federal science funding would reduce the US gross domestic product by
approximately 7.6%1. “This country’s status as the global leader in
science and innovation is seemingly hanging by a thread at this
point,” one NSF staffer says.


5/2/25: 

xFrom srm4n@virginia.edu Fri May  2 16:29:52 2025
Date: Fri, 2 May 2025 16:29:34
From: "Majewski, Steven R (srm4n)" <srm4n@virginia.edu>
To: "astro-faculty@virginia.edu" <astro-faculty@virginia.edu>,
"Johnson, Barbara Kay (bkn9x)" <bkn9x@virginia.edu>

Subject: [astro-faculty] Fwd: Adoption of Standard 15% Indirect Cost
         Rate for NSF Grants and Cooperative Agreements awarded to Institutions
         of Higher Education

Hello —

I haven’t received this notice from NSF, even though a colleague of mine at
another institution did. 

-sm

      Begin forwarded message:

Subject: Fw: Adoption of Standard 15% Indirect Cost Rate for NSF Grants
and Cooperative Agreements awarded to Institutions of Higher Education
Date: May 2, 2025 at 2:54:36 PM EDT
To: "srm4n@virginia.edu" <srm4n@virginia.edu>


________________________________________________________________________________
From: NSF eBusiness Outreach <EBUSINESS@LISTSERV.NSF.GOV> on behalf of NSF
Business Applications <NSF_Business_Applications@NSF.GOV>
Sent: Friday, May 2, 2025 12:39 PM
To: Nidever, David <david.nidever@montana.edu>
Subject: Adoption of Standard 15% Indirect Cost Rate for NSF Grants and
Cooperative Agreements awarded to Institutions of Higher Education 
**External Sender**

The U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) is updating its policy
regarding the reimbursement of indirect costs in federally funded
financial assistance. The Foundation is adopting a standard 15% indirect
cost rate for NSF grants and cooperative agreements awarded to
Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs).  The policy will apply to all new
NSF financial assistance awards to IHEs made on or after May 5, 2025.
 This change is intended to streamline funding practices, increase
transparency, and ensure that more resources are directed toward direct
scientific and engineering research activities.



5/2/25: 

xFrom aas@aas.org Fri May  2 21:23:19 2025
Date: Fri, 2 May 2025 21:23:12
From: American Astronomical Society <aas@aas.org>
To: rwo@virginia.edu
Subject: The President’s Budget Request and a Call to Action

The President’s Fiscal Year 2026 Budget Request proposes slashing $163
billion in federal spending. Please engage with us at the AAS to make
our voices heard!


Dear Colleague,

As you may have seen, the President’s Fiscal Year 2026 Budget Request*
was released today. This budget request provides suggestions for the
level of funding that Congress should appropriate for federal
programs. The plan proposes slashing $163 billion in federal spending
for the next fiscal year, which includes a 56% cut to the National
Science Foundation, a 47% cut to NASA's Science Mission Directorate,
and a 14% cut to the Department of Energy’s Office of Science. These
proposed cuts are certainly alarming, and the AAS Board of Trustees
has released a statement highlighting the potential impacts if such
cuts were to be enacted. If you are interested in reading more, Colin
Hamill has written a blog post explaining today’s budget request in
more detail. 


While the proposed cuts to our science agencies are deeply concerning,
it is important to remember that the President’s Budget Request is not
law, it is only a proposal. Congress holds the power of the purse and
will ultimately pass bills that set the funding levels for
FY26. During the first Trump administration, we saw large cuts to
science funding in the budget request, but Congress largely ignored
those cuts and chose to increase federal funding for the sciences.
However, for a multitude of reasons, we cannot assume the current
Congress will do the same this time. The President’s Budget Request
should serve as a call to action for our community — we are facing an
existential threat, and we must actively engage with Congress to show
why the work that we do is meaningful for the nation.  


Next week, AAS will be hosting a week of action, calling on all of us
to take a few minutes each day to engage in advocacy, whether that be
calling and emailing your members of Congress, or educating yourself
on federal science funding through a journal club. You can find
details for the week of action here, and keep an eye out on AAS social
media channels for daily guidance. I also encourage you to request a
Zoom or local meeting with your congressional offices and consider
inviting a congressional staffer to your institution/department. I met
with my own congressional office in Tucson a week ago, and earlier
this week, the faculty at Michigan State University invited a staffer
from their Representative’s office to visit the department. We need
more voices to do the same. Please reach out to the AAS public policy
team (public.policy@aas.org) and they would be thrilled to assist you
with setting up such meetings. If you would like to opt-in to regular
communications from the AAS policy team about advocacy actions you can
take, please fill out this short form. 


We are in unprecedented times of risk for scientific research. These
times call for extraordinary action if we want our elected
representatives and the public to continue to support this critical
work. Please engage with us at the AAS to make our voices heard!  


 — Dara Norman, AAS President


* Note that the request released today is a “skinny” budget, which
generally does not include proposed budgets at the division or program
level for these agencies. We expect more detailed information to be
released later this month. 



5/2/25: WP.  Amid DOGE-induced turmoil, National Science Foundation in
  crisis / The $9 billion agency exists entirely to fund science
  researchers, projects and facilities outside its Alexandria,
  Virginia, headquarters. It’s had to hit reverse on its main mission.

From Antarctic research stations to telescopes high in the Andes to
research submarines miles below the waves — and in laboratories and
classrooms across the United States — the fingerprint of the National
Science Foundation is vast and consequential. The 75-year-old
government agency has one function: keep the U.S. science enterprise
at the leading edge.

In the last two weeks, however, the $9 billion agency, which exists
entirely to fund science researchers, projects and facilities outside
its Alexandria, Virginia, headquarters, hit reverse on its main
mission.  NSF has been forced to cancel more than a thousand active
research grants. Funding for new research has slowed to a crawl, as
the agency has awarded half the number of grants since President
Donald Trump’s inauguration compared to the same period in 2024,
according to a Washington Post analysis of the NSF grants database. On
top of that, officials are running budget scenarios of drastic cuts
for next year.

Now there’s a leadership vacuum. Last week, NSF director Sethuraman
Panchanathan abruptly resigned, writing in an email to staff: “I have
done all I can.”

NSF funds basic science research, the kinds of questions sparked by
curiosity that may have no clear application and little interest from
corporations or philanthropies, but can deepen our understanding of
nature, spawn new industries and change the world. An NSF-funded
observatory was the first to detect ripples in space-time predicted by
Albert Einstein. NSF’s basic research into circuits and transistors
helped advance the chips that power modern technology. Some 268 Nobel
laureates have received funding from the agency.

The first months of Trump’s second presidency have been marked by the
unraveling of a historic relationship between research institutions
and federal government. That partnership, forged in the wake of World
War II, has powered American science preeminence.

...The journal Science reported that Trump’s draft budget proposal,
which has not yet been submitted to Congress, would cut 55 percent of
the NSF budget.

...“The US science machine that is the envy of the world is about to
be wrecked,” Michael Turner, a cosmologist at the University of
California at Los Angeles, said in an email. “If we go down the route
of dismantling the great American science machine we will suffer the
consequences in all aspects of life.”

...While serving under President Joe Biden, Panchanathan oversaw new
initiatives, mandated in congressional legislation, to broaden the
impact of, and participation in, science. Researchers seeking grants
have been required to describe how their work would advance those
goals. Such efforts, which seek to diversify the demographics of the
scientific community — historically dominated by White males — also
are designed to expand funding for research in institutions in rural
America and far from the coasts.

But the return of Trump put much of this in reverse. One of his first
actions was banning the use of federal money for DEI research.  NSF
officials immediately complied, launching keyword-triggered reviews of
grants, mining the agency’s vast research portfolio for topics the
administration no longer wanted to support, including DEI and “gender
ideology.”  The immediate compliance with Trump’s executive orders was
viewed as a betrayal by many of his own employees, but Panchanathan
continued. He went on to fire 10 percent of NSF’s employees, despite
internal anger — a blow that was later partly reversed.

...Then, in two tranches of cancellations, more than a thousand grants
were terminated, most of them focused on DEI. Also targeted are
“misinformation” and “disinformation” research programs.

NSF has been the focus of Republican ire in recent years. Last year,
Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) released a staff report that claimed to have
identified 3,483 NSF grants, totaling more than $2 billion, that
promoted DEI tenets or “pushed onto science neo-Marxist perspectives
about enduring class struggle.”  The Democratic staff of the House
Science, Space and Technology Committee responded this year with its
own report, saying the Cruz report contained “embarrassing mistakes”
such as flagging grants focused on biodiversity. “At best, the Cruz
Report is a sloppy mess that should be viewed as nothing more than the
political hit job it is,” the report said.

...The grant terminations at NSF may not be legal, said Rep. Zoe
Lofgren (California), the leading Democrat of the Science
Committee. And if the Trump administration does, as has been
speculated, push through drastic cuts to the budgets of NSF and other
science agencies it will be a “disaster,” she said.  “The vast
majority of GDP growth in the United States is related to science and
technology investments, and now we’re crushing it,” Lofgren
said. “There’s plenty of things that could be made better at
NSF. That’s different from gutting the agency.”

And the larger, flagship research infrastructure NSF runs — its
telescopes, its observatories, its South Pole operations — will also
be on the chopping block if extreme budget cuts are enacted, according
to multiple people familiar with planning scenarios.  “If the agency
is operating at 50 percent capacity, how should the agency approach
hard strategic decisions? Do you start shutting down astronomical
observatories? Do you turn off all of Antarctic operations?” said a
person familiar with the agency’s governance. “You have to look at the
biggest ticket items.”


Comments...

**[Guy Montag] Trump’s butchering of the National Science Foundation
isn’t fiscal conservatism—it’s the gleeful execution of American
genius by a scientifically illiterate strongman and his army of
know-nothing sycophants. Each canceled grant isn’t just a line
item—it’s a murder weapon, snuffing out potential cures, technological
revolutions, and the careers of young scientists who dared believe
their country valued knowledge. His administration isn’t merely
defunding DEI initiatives—it’s systematically erasing the voices and
perspectives that actually drive innovation, replacing peer review
with political purges led by the same troglodytes who think telescopes
promote "neo-Marxism."

    [cont] The Antarctic researchers left stranded, the observatories going
    dark, the graduate students whose life’s work now ends with a form
    email—these aren’t collateral damage. They’re casualties in
    Trump’s jihad against intellect itself, waged to satisfy his base
    of science-denying zealots who cheer as America burns its own
    laboratories to own the libs. When China’s labs lap ours, when our
    children inherit a wasteland of abandoned research and withered
    opportunity, when the last flicker of American scientific
    dominance gutters out—remember these cuts weren’t necessary. They
    were spite, distilled into policy by a man who can’t bear the
    thought of minds brighter than his own flourishing without his
    permission.  History won’t record this as budgeting —- it’ll stand as
    the moment America committed national suicide by stupidity.

They don't understand how fast scientific and tech leadership can move
to other countries. A lot of the research is on things that are not
immediatly lucrative so companies won't do it, but will lead to things
that may be transformative in 10 years or more. I have been involved
in AI research for years. For a long time, it seemed to go nowhere but
the NSF kept funding things that looked like they might be
promising. And at some point around the 2000's, some of the approaches
started to work well. And it got better, and now we have Gemini and
ChatGPT and other tools, none of which would have ever been built
without the years of NSF funded basic research. Other countries
understand this and will grab our best researchers.

Three grants I work on are cancelled. They are completely gutting STEM
education grants. More reporting on this please. I want people to
understand it is even less likely that their child will have a
competent physics teacher because of these incompetent criminals.

I'm a scientist. Twenty-five or thirty years ago, you rarely saw
papers written by Chinese scientists in high quality scientific
journals. Since then the fraction of papers written by Chinese authors
has exploded. I have also visited China and seen their labs - they are
filled with state-of-the-art equipment. I came away jealous.  My point
is that the Chinese are investing heavily in fundamental scientific
research. And Europe is increasing their investment as well. It is
completely idiotic for the US to be pulling back on fundamental
scientific research at this time.

     They are indeed investing in their country's future, and don't
     give a flying F&zk about billionaires.

The NSF funds the future for our grand children and their
children. Cutting off funding may put money in our current
billionaire's wallets, through tax reductions, but it will surely cost
our country dearly by the end of the century.

Nothing screams "America First" like systematically torching the very
scientific engine that made America first in the first place. After
all, who needs basic research, Nobel Prizes, new industries, or GDP
growth when you can have a bloated, self-congratulating bureaucracy
dedicated to witch hunts for scary words like "diversity" and
"climate"? Truly inspiring work, canceling a thousand research grants
is such a brilliant strategy to inspire the next generation of
scientists... to move to Europe. And what a leadership masterstroke —
NSF gutted, world-class telescopes shuttered, kids with dreams crushed
before graduation — all so we can finally protect America from the
terrifying menace of anole lizard genetics and "misinformation
studies."  

    [cont] Meanwhile, DOGE's idea of efficiency seems to involve
    swapping out world-class scientists for political hacks whose
    qualifications include owning at least three MyPillow products and
    never having read a book without pictures. Congratulations — in
    record time, DOGE has managed to transform the National Science
    Foundation into the National Science Fiction Foundation, because
    at this rate, the only research left will be fanfiction written by
    Ted Cruz about Marxist salamanders.  Truly, America is winning again.

If Trump really wants to keep America great (it doesn‘t really need to
be made great, again) he would double NSF‘s budget (actually ask
Congress to do so . . .).  Just another example of how little he knows
about what makes America great.

I have been involved in AI research for years. For a long time, it
seemed to go nowhere but the NSF kept funding things that looked like
they might be promising. And at some point around the 2000's, some of
the approaches started to work well. And it got better, and now we
have Gemini and ChatGPT and other tools, none of which would have ever
been built without the years of NSF funded basic research. Other
countries understand this and will grab our best researchers

We are rapidly destroying an entire generation of American scientific
prowess. Of all Trumps multitude of self-inflicted wounds and
disasters, this ranks near the top.

What will it take to get Republican legislators to speak up? There is
nothing conservative or patriotic about destroying much that has made
America great. Truly heartbreaking.

The NSF is a little known and relatively small agency that
nevertheless has had a major impact on innovation and our economic
success. The bulk our of graduate population (i.e PhDs) which populate
our tech companies is due to NSF funding. The sums involved are tiny
in comparison to other programs and the attack on NSF is purely
ideological.

European universities are knocking on the door of my colleagues
inviting them to leave the US. The brain drain begins.

There is nothing that Musk does that he doesn’t owe to the federal
funding of science. Period full stop.

DOGE has stupidity down to a science.

Trump is not making America great, he is literally destroying what
makes it great, impressive, envied, and admired by other countries
that could only dream of the ability to bankroll billions to keep
their country at the cutting edge of technology and innovation. Those
grants are what keeps this country making money and creating jobs that
will last for decades. Trump is cutting "waste" because he doesn't
understand what it takes to actually build or create anything. He's
lives his whole life play-acting a businessman with Daddy's money.

they cancelled grants that had as a goal studying 'magma inclusions'
.. something that happens under volcanos. Guess why ....

All NSF proposals were required to show how the proposed research is
benefiting the community. Proposals without a clearly-labeled
"statement of impact" were rejected. It is there where some DEI-like
language was gratuitously copy-and-pasted by lazy proposers, something
which back-fired under Trump.

          [Successful proposals did tend to use the trendy DEI
          catchwords...but not because of laziness.  That was EXPECTED
          under the revised grant protocols of the last five years.
          But yes, that backfired spectacularly.  Scientists are now
          being punished for doing what the government required them
          to do.]

       The idea of putting a hold on grants because the synopsis
       contains keywords like inclusive or bias is terrifying; can’t
       these people read whole paragraphs?

I am a professor at a small public STEM university. Our grad program
will absolutely be gutted if the current NSF "pause" on new awards and
refusal to commit yearly increments of funding for existing awards
continues.

These programs are EXACTLY what makes this country Great. In
conjunction with our great universities, these are the incubators for
the future of medicine, materials, energy and more.

Corporations are not interested in funding anything that will not be
in a product in the next 5 years.

We’re witnessing the revolt of the dummies. Stupid people don’t
understand science or its applications, and they resent people who do.

Science is involved with every aspect of our material lives.

They are smashing the machinery that built American supremacy. The
nation elected vandals and looters to strip its own wealth.

The indisputable fact at the core of this issue is that for every
dollar spent on research in the US we get something like $4-5 of
economic benefit.

It was foreign Scientists (Albert Einstein, Enrico Fermi, Neils Bohr,
et al) that made valuable contributions to the USA.  Even today, with
340 million or 4.1 % of the Globe's people, Science is one of the main
factors that enables us to "punch above our weight".  With Trump's
"War on Science" at the EPA, NWS, NOAA, and now, at the NSF, we are
falling into a Dark Age that will be hard to get out of.  And all this
to give $4 Trillion in tax breaks to Millionaires and Billionaires who
would never have become that rich, if they had been born in Bolivia or
Bangladesh.

This is absolutely bonkers. The Trump administration is steering a
course away from an economy based on innovation, and back to kids in
factories screwing widgets. It's just stone age bonkers thinking.

We salute you Comrade Trump!  Historians will credit your dismantling
of NSF as a key milestone in the making of the Chinese Century!

The current Administration is truly a ship of fools. Through
short-sightedness, greed, avarice, and sheer incompetence this
Administration is killing the goose that has been laying gigantic
golden eggs. Science fuels industry, and the US has been
second-to-none and the envy of the world. No longer.

Back in the 1980s, the Nation at Risk report warned that if a foreign
enemy had caused our schools to fail like they were, we’d see it as an
act of war. Well, today the same thing is happening to the National
Science Foundation. Only this time, it’s not a foreign enemy—it’s our
own leaders cutting funding, ignoring science, and tearing down the
very system that keeps us competitive. We’re doing to ourselves what
our enemies could only dream of.  The question is---WHY?

The portion of Panchanathan's letter quoted in the article has
apparently been cut from his letter as published on the NSF website:
https://www.nsf.gov/news/statement-director-sethuraman-panchanathan-his-departure
The research cuts this administration is making across government is
devastating, stupid, and totally at cross purposes with making America
great.

Trump is in a tariff tizzy while at the same time while sabotaging the
research engines that power American's leadership in science and
medicine. How is this not a threat to national security?!  Congress
needs to wake up and impeach this deluded fool who is overwhelmed by
stale yet vile grievances.


5/2/25:

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN
May 2, 2025

Funding Cuts Hit STEM Career Pipelines
Clare Zhang

NSF has already terminated hundreds of STEM education-related grants,
and Trump’s 2026 budget proposes even deeper cuts across the federal
government.

Federal funding cuts are hitting STEM engagement programs across the
career pipeline, from K-12 to postdocs and early-career
faculty. Almost half of NSF’s mass grant cancellations in April were
in the Directorate for STEM Education and dozens of the agency’s most
prestigious early-career faculty grants were terminated, according to
an agency list reviewed by FYI. Meanwhile, the president’s budget
request for fiscal year 2026 proposes cutting STEM engagement programs
at a variety of agencies, including a $4.7 billion reduction in
funding for general research and education and broadening
participation efforts at NSF.

According to a list provided by NSF’s union representative, between
April 18 and April 25, NSF canceled more than 1,000 active research
grants; this number includes collaborative grants awarded to multiple
institutions. Many of these were related to diversity, equity, and
inclusion or misinformation, and the agency’s announcement stated that
the grants no longer “effectuate” agency priorities. NSF has since
stopped disbursing grant funds, including for new grants and yearly
allotments for current grants, and begun screening proposals for
“topics or activities that may not be in alignment with agency
priorities,” Nature reported.

The president’s budget request released today proposes further cuts to
“climate; clean energy; woke social, behavioral, and economic
sciences; and programs in low priority areas of science” as well as
NSF’s “broadening participation” efforts.

The elimination of grants deemed to be related to DEI has
disproportionately affected grants for STEM education, with 213
cancellations in the Division of Research on Learning, which supports
research on STEM learning and teaching in K-12 schools and other
centers for STEM education, such as museums. The canceled grants
pursued a range of strategies to engage with new audiences in STEM,
such as implementing “inclusive” curricula, developing after-school
programs, and shaping students’ professional identity formation. Many
focus on women and Black and Latinx learners; NSF’s recent
announcement states that it will only fund activities to reach
individuals from underrepresented groups in STEM “as part of broad
engagement activities” that are “open and available to all Americans.”

The Division of Undergraduate Education had 63 grants canceled, many
of which similarly focus on researching or developing racially
equitable learning environments. Other grant terminations are less
clearly connected to the agency’s new approach to DEI, such as a grant
for an experiential learning program to expose undergraduates to the
semiconductor industry, which references “systematically embedding
diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility” into its activities
“from student recruitment, educational program design, to course
design.”

NSF also funds summer research experiences for undergraduates through
the REU program, which provides students with stipends and, in some
cases, assistance with housing, meals, and travel. Each REU site is
located at a university and supports eight to ten students per year
from other institutions. Science reported in February that many REU
sites seeking renewals for their expiring three-year grants were told
that this summer’s program had been canceled due to a lack of
funding. On social media, researchers reported that NSF awarded 52 REU
grants in 2025, compared to around 200 every year since 2015.

NSF additionally terminated 15 active grants for REU sites in
April. Andrew Rice, the principal investigator for the REU site at
Portland State University’s Center for Climate and Aerosol Research,
received a termination notice on April 25 informing him that the
program would not receive the three-year, $500,000 grant that the
agency originally agreed to fund. The termination has put an end, at
least for this year, to the university’s 10-year-old program.  Rice
has notified this year’s accepted students that the program has been
canceled, as they no longer have the money to support students’
stipends and housing, he said. “My experience is, if you want to
really be very inclusive and allow everybody to do it, you do need to
pay students to do that work,” he added.

Rice noted that all REUs are open to all U.S. undergraduate
students. Most of Portland State’s REU participants come from two-year
community colleges or four-year institutions that have fewer resources
to support undergraduate research, and many of the participants have
never conducted research before, he said.

The program gives these students exposure to the one-on-one mentorship
of graduate programs, Rice said. “It really starts them on the right
path,” he added. “And for me, that’s how I got started… I knocked on a
bunch of doors until someone took me in, and… that’s where I got
hooked. That first research experience, I was like, ‘This is really
cool. Do they pay people to do this?’” The grant terminations also had
a significant effect on researchers at the graduate level and beyond,
with 51 grant cancellations in the Division of Graduate Education,
including 12 postdoctoral fellowships. One Bluesky user shared that
his postdoctoral offer was rescinded following the termination of its
underlying grant, while another said his wife is no longer receiving a
salary after her grant was terminated. NSF also awarded 1,000 graduate
research fellowships this year, compared to more than 2,000 every year
since 2021.  Additionally, 65 CAREER grants, NSF’s most prestigious
grants for early-career researchers, have been canceled.

STEM EDUCATION CUTS AT OTHER AGENCIES

The president’s budget request proposes eliminating NASA’s Office of
STEM Engagement, stating that “NASA will inspire the next generation
of explorers through exciting, ambitious space missions, not through
subsidizing woke STEM programming and research that prioritizes some
groups of students over others and have had minimal impact on the
aerospace workforce.”

So far, it is unclear how many STEM engagement grants have been
canceled. NASA said in March that it canceled $420 million in
“unneeded contracts.” The Department of Government Efficiency database
and the NASA Grants database include canceled grants worth over
$600,000 total for workshops, conferences, and recruitment for
professional societies, including the National Association of Black
Physicists and the Society of Women Engineers.

The agency has also canceled two grants under its Science Activation
program for community engagement, including the Native Earth | Native
Sky project, a five-year grant in its final year that worked to
develop and implement culturally relevant STEM curricula for Native
American middle school students.  “It’s unclear to me why something
like this would be cut. Because what we’re really trying to do from a
grand, 40,000-foot view is to get more young students, particularly
middle schoolers, interested in all STEM fields,” said Kat
Gardner-Vandy, the principal investigator for Native Earth | Native
Sky. “So to me, it means the result is fewer students who see
themselves as scientists and who see themselves as wanting to grow up
and perhaps go into these fields.  And if we don’t have that
workforce, the United States is really going to fall pretty far behind
the rest of the world in terms of STEM.”

Furthermore, NASA appears poised to cancel the Here to Observe program
that paired undergraduates from underrepresented groups and at smaller
research universities with scientists running NASA missions, Science
reported.  

At the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the
president’s 2026 budget request calls for more than a billion dollars
in cuts to NOAA, specifically calling out “educational grant programs
[that] have consistently funded efforts to radicalize students against
markets and spread environmental alarm.” This may refer to the
agency’s Sea Grant program, which allocates millions of dollars a year
for education and research at 34 colleges and universities. The agency
already moved to cancel Maine’s Sea Grant program, possibly at Trump’s
behest after he and the governor of Maine had a public argument, but
agreed to “renegotiate” the $4.5 million grant less than a week later.



5/2/25: WP.  George Will.  The Trump GOP’s attacks on universities
advance the left’s agenda / The political attacks on Harvard and other
educational institutions aren’t conservative at all.

Even academics are educable, so universities might emerge from their
current travails improved — more willing to include intellectual
diversity on campuses, or at least be more circumspect about impeding
it. This is the good news.

The bad news: Republicans rejoicing about breaking academia to the
saddle and bridle of federal government supervision demonstrate that we
have two parties barely distinguishable in their shared enthusiasm for
muscular statism. As “conservatives” mount sustained attacks on
left-dominated educational institutions, they advance the left’s
perennial agenda: the permeation of /everything/ with politics.

Such statism will extinguish THE core conservative aspiration: a civil
society in constant creative ferment because intermediary institutions —
schools, businesses, religious and civic organizations — are given
breathing room, and are free to flourish or fail without supervision
from above by a minatory central authority.

The president says he wants to “reclaim” the universities. His verb
implies restoration: that the universities once were what he wants
them to be, APPENDAGES OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, subject to its
agendas, which shift with gusts from the electorate. Even if the
administration were not FLAGRANTLY VIOLATING THE LAW (THE
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT) CONCERNING DUE PROCESS when freezing or
withdrawing federal funds from universities, it would then be doing
lawfully what should not be done at all.

The administration is right about protecting Jewish students from
campus antisemitism. But this CONCERN LOOKS INCREASINGLY PRETEXTUAL as
the administration broadens government’s reach to encompass
universities’ admissions, hiring, administrative and curriculum
decisions, and to punish plagiarism, and more.

The political class is to be trusted to define proper “viewpoint
diversity” in “each department, field, or teaching unit.” (This
language is from the administration’s letter commanding Harvard
University.) And to measure the government-enforced diversity that
conservatives favor — a “critical mass” of appropriately diverse
faculty hires — by its intellectual micrometer. And to police
deviations from propriety.

A German concept used to validate the society-saturating politics
infecting Europe 90 years ago was /Gleichschaltung/. It denoted
totalistic government: the “coordinating” or “harmonizing” of all
important social institutions. A foreign word, but no longer a foreign
practice.

As a candidate in 2023, Donald Trump vowed to “choke off the money” to
schools assaulting “Western civilization itself.” As he defines this,
and as he defines “assaulting” it. What could go wrong?

**America’s research universities are sources of U.S. economic dynamism
and vital to technology-dependent national security. It is folly (and
unlawful) to punish entire institutions for the foolishness of a few
departments. When English departments are “decolonized” — dead White
men purged from the curriculum — the only victims are students
deprived of Shakespeare. Ideological indoctrination is rarer in
engineering departments, where knowing the right facts rather than
having the right feelings matters, otherwise bridges crumble and
skyscrapers tumble.  Leave all departments alone, some because their
silliness does not matter much, others because their excellence
matters greatly.

Some Republicans want to further tax universities’ endowments. There
is a 1.4 percent tax on a few of the largest, which include thousands
of individual funds dedicated to particular uses, and money for
student aid. The crux of the conservative case against taxation of
endowments is: Such taxation is partly /intended/ to further the
homogenization of society — to enlarge government’s sway by enfeebling
a rival source of independent judgment and action.

More devastating than taxing endowments would be stripping
institutions of what enables them to build endowments: their
tax-exempt status and their donors’ right to tax deductions. The
president says the universities’ exemptions are “totally contingent on
acting in the public interest!” He seems to define this as CONFORMITY
to his administration’s agenda and preferences. As the next Democratic
administration surely will do regarding its agenda. The IRS can be a
hammer for pounding various institutions into obedience to the
presidency of the moment.

...Today, each party pretends to be dramatically different from the other
regarding philosophical fundamentals. Actually, they offer no clear
choice to voters who are wary of /any/ American Gleichschaltung. Both
parties seem equally oblivious to the deep disharmony that inevitably
accompanies attempts to harmonize all important sectors of civil society
by melding political and cultural power.

What could go wrong? Look around.


Comments...

[AI summary]  The comments overwhelmingly criticize George Will's
attempt to equate the actions of both political parties regarding
universities, with many arguing that the Trump administration's
efforts to control universities are authoritarian and
unprecedented. Commenters emphasize that the left's agenda is more
aligned with education and democracy, while the right's actions are
seen as destructive to academic freedom and democratic values. There
is a strong sentiment that the false equivalency presented by Will
distracts from the real threat posed by the current administration's
policies

=====

I greatly appreciate George Will's robust defence of the value of
research universities and academic freedom.  On the other hand, I
agree with almost everyone else here that the GOP now is, by far, a
greater threat to the American system than any faction of the
Democrats.  What is most revealing about the column, however, is
Will's assertion that the "foolish" wokeism of some humanities
departments is hardly of serious consequence in the context of the
importance of universities.  Hasn't he devoted something like ten
columns every year for the last couple decades to hammering
universities about their progressive and post-modern tilt?  That was
not entirely undeserved -- but Will did more than his share to spread
suspicion about the integrity of universities, and his former GOP
colleagues were thrilled to pick that up and fashion it into a
political battering ram against universities that not only drew MAGA
glee but now threatens their independent existence.  


=====


As an outsider (Canadian), that has voted for both conservatives and
liberals in my over 40 years of adult life, what I see in Will’s
latest piece is an irresponsible false equivalency.  Yes, the
Democrats can, and sometimes do, overreach. But on the whole, they
“get” the value of western liberal democracy - the broad brushstrokes
- even if they sometimes go off course in the fog of ideological
battle (woke, and all that). But MAGA is an an entirely different
creature - a monster, in fact. It is not open to any dissent, and
aggressively imperil dissent everywhere and every way. They operate
based on: Might makes right. We are right. Lay the others to ruble.
There is simply no equivalency.

   Academia's Quasi Communism curriculum is a threat and has done
   damage to the party of Kennedy.  Half the nation wishing to be
   European isn't a good trend and is a direct result of higher
   Ed. indoctrination. Much more damaging than the MAGA monster

      I’m simply baffled by this reply. Does Bi-Polar-Violations
      really think that some obscure professors, speaking to a small
      segment of a student body, which is a portion of a minority
      segment of the USA (i.e., those attending degree granting
      institutions) is a bigger threat that a President that pardons
      January 6 insurrectionists, and empowers thug like squads to
      grab off the street, imprison, and deport human beings without a
      shred of due process, etc. etc. to infinity? The vast majority
      of Americans can ignore the pronoun police. But what happens
      when you turn law enforcement into unaccountable gangsters, or
      turn violent anti democratic militia into heroes for the sole
      reason that they are loyal to the Don?

      Indeed, great point. We should make sure the children are
      indoctrinated to fear the countries ranking highest on the world
      happiness index, and go back to putting fear of the specter of
      communism into them. Surely that will help the country go back
      to the cherished ages that were a direct result of the New Deal.

      Nonsense. Nonsense. And more Nonsense.  Reading your responses
      to A Canadian Bob I’m reminded of what physicist Wolfgang
      Paulsaid said: “What you said, was so confused that one could
      not tell whether it was nonsense or not"

You can try to say this is a both sides issue. But at the moment there
is only one party that is dismantling our constitutional rights. Only
one party that is attempting to subdue the free press. Only one party
that is using fear and intimidation to keep its own members in line.

George Will has been returning to the “both sides” well a lot lately …
which I guess is what you do when you’re afraid to say, “the party I’m
still bound to are becoming fascists.”  We’re told universities are
“woke” and discriminate against conservative opinions. There’s no
evidence, we’re just told to believe it. On the other hand, the damage
Trump is doing to the universities is measurable and very real.
There’s no “both sides” here, George.

    Do try to get out of your epistemic bubble; reluctant though I am
    to use the Disparate Impact fallacy, the non-hiring (and sometimes
    firing) of conservative professors is striking. The president of
    Princeton (Mr Will’s alma mater) for instance, was recently asked
    to name a conservative professor other than its token
    conservative, and was unable to. (Partly because the other one was
    fired a couple of years ago, via double jeopardy after blaspheming
    one of the tribal gods, even though he had tenure.)  Being Jewish
    didn’t used to count as conservative, but the evidence for campus
    anti-semitism is overwhelming. I don’t see how it could have
    escaped the notice of even a WaPo commenter, even if there has
    also been overreach on broadening the definition of anti-semitism
    to include constitutionally-protected hate speech, or even lack of
    support for Zionism.  Mr Will, by the way, is uncharacteristically
    ahistorical here: "It is folly (and unlawful) to punish entire
    institutions for the foolishness of a few departments."  I agree
    with President Reagan’s unsuccessful veto of the relevant law, but
    it does mandate exactly that: All of Bob Jones University lost its
    tax exemption because of discrimination mandated by its strange
    God; all of Harvard is likewise unambiguously required to lose its
    tax exemption because of its strange gods.

Banning books, defunding support of Universities, elimination of the
Department of Education, defunding science and research while
installing unqualified anti-science loyalists in charge healthcare and
the FDA, blatant lawlessness, etc. When exactly will you call it out
for what it is? This is all authoritarian in nature, and fascism will
rise from said authoritarian. Look at history to predict the future.

Statism in pursuit of repression and inequallty and more wealth
disparity is not equivalent to statism that attempts to promote
equality and an equal distribution of wealth. The Republicans have
gotten away with the "government is the problem" lie since Reagan.

The President is kidnapping people and sending them to life in prison,
while grifting a crypto scam.  That’s reality George.

Anyone who thinks ANYTHING the dems do is equal to or worse than what
Trump et al are doing needs to have their head examined.

Wrong. Trump is trying to bend Universities to his will with
government fiat. But the Democratic party has imposed no such fiat. If
schools and faculty lean liberal it is because over generations there
has been a free market place of ideas that drift to the left. The very
substance of the subjects in humanities and social sciences force a
liberal viewpoint: one cannot read Les Miserable and be Republican, at
least not this current flavor of cruelty in the party. One cannot
study America history of slavery and be a white supremacist, one
cannot study the economics of famine and not advocate for sharing
wealth, one cannot study biology and ever advocate for creationism. A
good education is truly a liberal education. Republicans just cannot
accept that the free market place of ideas bypasses cynicism, greed,
and cruelty.

    Hiring policies for faculty in Ivy League schools in last 20 years
    suggest an otherwise a “not free marketplace of ideas.” Or maybe
    just a coincidence that overwhelming majority of Ivy League
    faculty hired in last 20 years were already left leaning
    democrats?

       The faculty hired are selected by the school and not under
       government fiat. There are Christian right wing universities in
       America that are not threatened by Trump, so he is being
       selective in his self righteous campaign against the woke DEI
       loving elites. The Republicans have been eager to bring down
       universities long before Trump.

Just a note, but those blue States comprise the worlds 5th largest economy.
Red States not so much.

   Actually, California alone is the world's 4th largest economy. All
   the blue states together might be the 3rd largest.

The 'left's agenda' is economic growth, social progress, national
security and scientific discovery.

Maybe Harvard and other "elite" universities are liberal because an
education helps one to see the world through a lens of acceptance and
not one of domination. These institutions, for the most part, welcome
diversity and accept that the world and society is changiing. Unlike
conservatives, who are always looking in the review mirror and talking
about traditional values and trying to make the world a static
place. All institutions have problems and need to make changes, but to
think that a want-to-be dictator who brags about not reading and who
cannot speak in complete thoughts knows what to do is rediculous.

I never understand why Will always wants to say "Democrats do it, too"
when they clearly don't.

Will fails to distinguish what Trump is doing (statist control of
universities to promote a fascist agenda) from what universities have
done on their own to ensure diversity.

Speaking from experience as a retired university professor, sadly, the
academic "leftists" that Will fantasizes about hardly exist. "They"
are a false stereotype fabricated through the rhetoric of right wing
ideologues for decades based in some kind of
if-you-don't-believe-in-my-God-you-must-believe-in-my-devil
presupposition. Adding conservative ideologues to the faculty doesn't
advance critical thinking, discovery, or even a useful diversity of
thought because today's right wing sees words and numbers as weapons
to deploy in service of ideological culture war battles, leaving the
so-called "left" disarmed by our nearly universal assumption that
words and numbers exist for the purpose of optimally discovering and
representing the truth about reality. 

   [cont.] Reality is a vast mystery for all human beings of whatever
   political bias, but it seems that only the so-called "leftists" who
   populate rigorous, truth-seeking disciplines have the humility and
   curiosity to explore it. The political right primarily cares about
   power, domination and pretending to always BE 100% right by
   nature. Evidence is self-evidently being respected on the political
   right only if it confirms preexisting right wing biases (see for
   instance Fox News or the rhetoric generated by Republican
   politicians). The intellectual diversity of universities is not
   benefited by hiring faculty with this kind of right-wing mindset.

George got it mostly right, up until he wrote that both Dems and Reps
are the same on this issue. That is ludicrous. Dems have never tried
to impose anything on universities that the universities didn't seem
to have wanted anyway, e.g. DEI. But, he deserves credit for calling
out the danger for what it is. The US higher education system is the
envy of the world and a huge producer of wealth for our nation. Trump
endangers the whole thing.

Nobody goes into education or public service to make money. Liberals
are the ones who care.

I struggle to see the Democrat Party and mainstream media the way
George Will and other conservatives portray them. Will accurately
describes this Trump Administration’s bullying and unconstitutional
and unlawful attempt to take over the administrations of private
universities. I am unaware of any time in history when a Democrat
President or Administration attempted to do the same, or anything even
close. And yet Will asserts that somehow the Democrat party has
attempted to coerce speech and orchestrate a government take over of
private universities too. Huh? Never happened.
     
   [cont.] Conservatives claim that mainstream media is biased
   completely against them, they whine about it constantly. And yet,
   many conservatives write for this paper and others across the
   country, many of them own these papers. Show me one right wing
   media outlet that employs liberals and progressives and allows them
   to write or speak from their perspective.  This false equivalency
   on regular display in mainstream media by conservatives is a big,
   big reason we are in the throes of an actual authoritarian
   takeover. Conservatives seem determined to convince themselves that
   a liberal scold with a higher education is worse than a wannabe
   dictator determined to overthrow our constitutional republic and
   they can’t seem to spot the authoritarian takeover in progress by
   their own party right now.

For all the years you have been a columnist you have infused
everything with politics, George. As I keep saying, the academy has
been left since ancient Greece because liberals are more
intellectually curious than the right wing and less focused on making
tons of money. But when they teach they don't teach politically. In
political philosophy they still teach Plato, the theorist for fascism,
and still teach Machiavelli who I think was writing a satire with the
Prince (contrast with the Discourses) but is considered quite right
wing. They still teach Hegel, the theorist of the nation state and the
duty of all citizens to do whatever the gov't tells them to do. I have
no idea where you get the notion that because most professors are left
and most conservatives want to make more money than colleges pay so
they don't do professor stuff as much what is taught in the assigned
reading is just left. It isn't. It never was. It would only be that
way if the right takes over the academy and lies like it does, like
you do. You really need to stop this nonsense, George. You could have
taught at university; you chased the money instead. Right?

Why not just clearly say that what the administration is doing is
taking a page out of the authoritarian playbook? The Trump
administration is trying to enfeeble all independent sources of
judgment and action, whether it be the media (see Paramount and CPB
news just this week), law firms, or universities.



5/6/25: IHE. Documenting Trump’s ‘Arbitrary’ Cuts to Science / The
  Trump administration has canceled close to $3 billion in NIH and NSF
  research grants, often without much explanation. Now researchers are
  crowdsourcing databases of suspended grants to shed light on what’s
  being lost.

...Although the Trump administration and its allies have spotlighted
National Institutes of Health and the National Science
Foundation–funded projects on politically charged topics—including
transgender people’s health, HIV prevention, vaccine hesitancy,
misinformation and diversity, equity and inclusion—as examples of
canceled projects, those are far from the only research areas that
have lost funding since January.

The agencies have also axed funding for research on cancer, maternal
mortality and internet freedom without much explanation. And lacking
comprehensive data from the government, the scholarly community has
been tracking the cuts on their own terms in an attempt to understand
the scope and scale of the losses.

...Delaney and his colleagues were aware of terminated NIH grants that
weren’t on the HHS spreadsheet. So, they put out a call for
submissions on social media and created their own publicly accessible
spreadsheet documenting the canceled research projects they could
verify through those submissions as well as from news reports, social
media posts and available government data.

The culmination of those efforts is available on Grant Watch, a
website Delaney helped launch last week. It tracks and lists grant
terminations at the NIH and the National Science Foundation—which has
also canceled more than 1,000 grants over the past month as it
undergoes ideologically driven priority shifts similar to those
reshaping the NIH. The goal, he said, is to give academic researchers
and their advocates another tool to resist policy decisions that many
argue will hamper university budgets and local economies, slow
scientific innovation, and weaken the United States’ global
competitiveness.

...According to Grant Watch’s tally, as of late last week the NIH had
canceled some 789 research grants—totaling roughly $2 billion—and the
NSF had canceled 1,042, worth more than $780 million. Inside Higher Ed
reached out to both the NIH and NSF last week, but both agencies
declined to specify the total amount of federal funding they’ve
canceled so far this year. An NSF spokesperson declined to produce a
detailed list of the grants the agency recently terminated, and HHS
sent Inside Higher Ed a link to the HHS spreadsheet that partly
inspired Delaney and his colleagues to create Grant Watch.

...Grant Watch isn’t the only project academics have undertaken in an
attempt to create a robust record of the scope, scale and consequences
of gutting federal support for research. Abby Andre, a graduate
student at Ohio State University who previously worked as an attorney
for the U.S. Department of Justice, recently launched the Impact
Project after finding it difficult to keep track of the deluge of
reports about mass federal worker firings, funding freezes and grant
terminations.  The need for the Impact Project—which is far broader in
scope than the database Delaney and his team at Harvard created to
document NIH and NSF cuts—stems from the unprecedented “pace of change
in the federal government,” she said.

...While she has used some available government data, she also
cross-references it with news reports and crowdsourced information to
build out and update the Impact Map, which categorizes funding cuts by
location, sector—including education, housing and academic
research—and type of cut, such as funding cancellations or federal
worker firings.  It offers a visualization of the “severe” cuts to
federal research funding and the implications they have for hundreds
of higher education institutions and the communities they serve, she
said. Indeed, not one state in the country has been spared.

Academic institutions are one of our primary sources of research and
drive knowledge across sectors,” Andre said. “The concern is not only
that we’re losing knowledge, resources and future answers to complex
problems, but that we’re also going to be diminishing the value of
higher education as funding is diminished.”


5/7/25:  

Date: Wed, 7 May 2025 16:57:47
From: FYI <fyi@aipcomm.org>
Subject: State Department Poised to Close S&T Cooperation Office

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN

State Department Poised to Close S&T Cooperation Office /
International scientific collaboration agreements could face
significant disruption or delay if plans to eliminate the office go
forward.

  The State Department plans to eliminate its Office of Science and
  Technology Cooperation as part of a sweeping reorganization at the
  agency, current and former staff members at the department told FYI.

  Thousands of scientific collaboration agreements between the
  U.S. and foreign countries are negotiated and overseen by the
  office, including agreements that allow U.S. researchers to access
  international science facilities such as CERN and ITER. While some
  of these agreements automatically renew, others will lapse without
  intervention, potentially disrupting international research
  collaborations and data sharing agreements as well as research
  facility access abroad.

  Staff at the office were told in late April that their unit would
  most likely be closed and their positions terminated as part of the
  department-wide reorganization effort announced by Secretary of
  State Marco Rubio on April 22. A final decision is expected later
  this month and would take effect July 1. Unlike some other science
  offices at the department that are rumored to be facing
  consolidation, such as the Office of the Science and Technology
  Advisor and the Office of the Special Envoy for Critical and
  Emerging Technology, there are no apparent plans to merge or
  reorganize the cooperation office into another unit.

  “There are grave concerns about how the work will proceed,” said a
  State Department employee who requested anonymity to speak freely
  about internal discussions. “It is completely unclear which office
  will take on this work and how they would have the bandwidth and
  authority to do so.”

  When senior department officials told staff the cooperation office
  was earmarked for elimination, the news came as a surprise, multiple
  sources told FYI. The employee quoted above described the decision
  as “baffling,” given how much the Trump administration claims to
  support American leadership in the technology space.

  “The president himself has stressed the importance of emerging
  technology, and some of the foremost government experts in fields
  like quantum and biotech are part of the Office of Science and
  Technology Cooperation,” the employee said.  They added that the
  office is the only part of the State Department that works with all
  federal science agencies to “make sure that our approach to
  international work is thorough and covers the broad scope of
  American science and tech priorities.”

  “To say that another office — which is probably already operating on
  a shoestring budget — can simply take on the work is laughable,” the
  employee said.

  The office has around 20 staff members who are a mixture of foreign
  service and civil service officers, contractors, and fellows, some
  with more than a decade of experience. While the foreign service
  officers may be reassigned to new roles if their positions are
  eliminated, the rest of the staff are set to lose their jobs.

  Some staff members told FYI they are already looking for new
  employment but are hopeful that the department might reverse
  course. No staff contacted by FYI have yet received written notice
  of their termination.  A State Department spokesperson did not
  confirm whether the office is in line for elimination, stating
  simply that the secretary of state has asked the under secretaries
  to draw up reorganization and workforce optimization plans to be
  reviewed this month.

  Science and technology agreements set to expire over the next 12-18
  months include ones with countries such as Japan, Egypt, Oman,
  Indonesia, Singapore, Pakistan, Tunisia, and the UAE. Though some of
  these will renew automatically, the employee said the absence of the
  office means the U.S. will lose its ability to negotiate changes and
  “ensure we have the right protections for research security, the
  best access to data, and the best way forward for advancing emerging
  technology.” Some of the most high-profile agreements that the
  office oversees do not auto-renew, including those with China and
  the European Union.  The office is also involved in managing joint
  science and technology funds with countries such as Israel, India,
  and Egypt, as well as the U.S. Science Envoy Program and the Embassy
  Science Fellows Program, among others. It is unclear what will
  happen to these programs if the office is eliminated.

  The cooperation office is “one of those tiny supports upon which the
  majority of major international science projects rest,” said Cole
  Donovan, a former long-time employee of the office, in a social
  media post last week. In addition to U.S. researchers potentially
  losing access to international facilities, Donovan warned that the
  closure of the office could potentially pause progress on major
  science facilities under construction in the U.S. if agreements
  covering international financial contributions are not completed.
  Speaking to FYI, Donovan noted that the Case-Zablocki Act requires
  that federal agencies consult with the State Department before
  entering into any international agreements representing the United
  States. All of the agreements that touch on science, with the
  exception of those related to space, come through the cooperation
  office for review. Science agreements represent one of the largest
  categories of international agreements that the department reviews,
  Donovan said, as so many involve information sharing or have to be
  checked to ensure they protect American intellectual property
  rights.

  Asked about the potential fallout of eliminating the office, Donovan
  said he was concerned that the loss of rapid and routine approval
  for international scientific relationships could have widespread
  implications that may not be immediately obvious. The U.S. has
  agreements with international forecasting and emergency management
  organizations, for example, which “if not maintained, could damage
  the ability of scientists to share timely emergency information in
  response to natural disasters,” he said.

  “I think the impact is probably going to be much larger than people
  expect, and not necessarily in ways that people might think about,”
  Donovan added.



5/7/25:  

Date: Wed, 7 May 2025 12:07:30
From: FYI <fyi@aipcomm.org>

Subject: Republican-led States Angle for NASA Headquarters

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN

Republican-led States Angle for NASA Headquarters / Politicians from
 Texas, Florida, and Ohio are pushing to move NASA headquarters out of
 Washington, DC.

Legislators and governors from Texas, Florida, and Ohio are working to draw
NASA’s headquarters to their home states.

  Led by Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) and Rep. Brian Babin (R-TX), all 27
  Republicans on Texas’s congressional delegation sent a letter in
  April to President Donald Trump urging him to relocate NASA’s
  headquarters to the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston,
  Texas. “NASA is disconnected from the day-to-day work of its centers
  and hindered by bureaucratic micromanagement in Washington,” the
  letter states. It goes on to argue that the agency would be better
  served in Houston because Johnson Space Center “maintains the
  largest NASA workforce, accommodates extensive research and
  development partnerships, and houses Mission Control.”  Meanwhile,
  Sens. Rick Scott (R-FL) and Ashley Moody (R-FL) introduced the
  Consolidating Aerospace Programs Efficiently at Canaveral (CAPE
  Canaveral) Act to relocate NASA’s headquarters from Washington to
  Florida’s Space Coast in Brevard County. A companion bill was
  introduced in the House by 11 Republicans and three Democrats.

  Cape Canaveral is home to NASA’s Kennedy Space Center and the Cape
  Canaveral Space Force Station. The Florida Council of 100, a
  nonprofit organization comprised of business leaders, wrote a letter
  to Florida’s congressional delegation in support of relocating
  NASA’s headquarters to Florida’s Space Coast.

  The same day that the CAPE Canaveral Act was introduced, Ohio
  Gov. Mike DeWine (R) sent a letter to Trump asking him to move
  NASA’s headquarters to Cleveland, the home of NASA’s Glenn Research
  Center. Rep. Max Miller (R-OH) and Sen. Jon Husted (R-OH) followed
  suit by sending similar letters to Vice President JD Vance and NASA
  administrator nominee Jared Isaacman.  NASA published an update in
  November on its efforts to find a new headquarters building ahead of
  its lease expiration in 2028. The agency indicated it is seeking a
  375,000 to 525,000 square-foot facility “in Washington or the
  immediate surrounding area.” However, Politico has reported that
  there have been internal discussions at NASA about possibly doing
  away with a centralized headquarters altogether and instead
  dispersing those responsibilities across states.

  Discussions about relocating NASA’s headquarters come in the wake of
  the Trump administration’s February executive order directing agency
  heads to identify leases eligible for termination. A subsequent memo
  from the Office of Personnel Management instructed agency heads to
  develop reorganization and workforce downsizing plans that include
  “any proposed relocations of agency bureaus and offices from
  Washington, DC, and the National Capital Region to less-costly parts
  of the country.” Those plans were due in April and have not been
  made public.

  During his presidential campaign, Trump promised to move up to
  100,000 federal workers out of DC. During his first term, he moved
  branches of the U.S.  Department of Agriculture to Missouri and the
  Bureau of Land Management headquarters to Colorado. The decision was
  reversed in 2021 under the Biden administration and the BLM moved
  back to DC.

  Lawmakers in support of relocation across Texas, Florida, and Ohio
  all say that moving NASA’s headquarters out of DC would lower agency
  operating costs, save taxpayers money, improve efficiency, and
  provide a boost to their local economies. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis
  (R) claims that relocation would save the agency “about a billion
  dollars.”

  In Ohio, the Cleveland City Council passed a resolution aimed at
  persuading the federal government to relocate NASA’s headquarters
  there. “Moving NASA headquarters to Cleveland, Ohio would: provide
  significantly lower cost of living and operational costs than
  Washington, DC, resulting in substantial taxpayer savings;
  strategically align efforts to decentralize federal agencies;
  reinvigorate Ohio as the birthplace of aviation and the heart of
  America’s aerospace industry; and optimize workforce and facility
  use by consolidating operations near an existing NASA field center,”
  the resolution reads.  Meanwhile, some lawmakers have contested the
  notion that moving agency headquarters will result in new
  efficiencies. Rep. Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-DC) introduced a bill in
  March that would prohibit the relocation of agencies’ headquarters
  outside Washington without Congressional approval, arguing that
  “Congress cannot write laws or conduct oversight without the
  critical information provided by agencies” in the National Capital
  Region.

  “Moving federal agencies is not about saving taxpayer money and will
  degrade the vital services provided to all Americans across the
  country,” Holmes Norton said in a March press release. “In the
  1990s, the Bureau of Land Management moved its wildfire staff out
  West, only to move them back when Congress demanded briefings on new
  wildfires,” she added.


5/8/25:  NASA Watch.  The Cost of Breaking The GISS Lease 

Several sources report that the NASA GISS lease of the Armstrong Hall
building in New York City can’t be broken by GSA without incurring a
large financial penalty. So, if NASA leaves anyway with a DOGE claim
of a cost savings NASA will still be paying ~$3 million a year until
2031 for a building they can’t/won’t use – – plus the rent for
wherever the GISS folks are moved to.


5/9/25: NASA Watch.  USRA’s Non-Deletion Deletion of LPI Website
Material

Keith’s note: a week ago I posted Erasing NASA Diversity Abstracts Is
Not That Easy saying “The NASA DEI Erasure Squad has been busy. If you
search for past LPSC abstracts on DEI, DEIA, diversity etc. you’ll see
that they have disappeared and prior meeting agendas have been
altered.” Well they have been busy and huge amounts of material are
simply vanishing. USRA did this stealthily until too many people
started to notice – only then did they have the notion that they
should say something using some classic Orwellian Double Speak. (More
below)

According to Nature: ‘Orwellian’: planetary scientists outraged over
deletion of research records: “Over the past several weeks, hundreds
of meeting abstracts have quietly vanished from the websites of
research conferences organized by the Lunar and Planetary Institute
(LPI) in Houston, Texas — a NASA-funded research institution that
maintains key archives and information about US planetary science. The
abstracts have a common theme: diversity, equity and inclusion
(DEI). These topics were banned from receiving government funding by a
20 January executive order from US President Donald Trump, who called
them “illegal and immoral discrimination programs”. The LPI did not
seek permission from the abstract authors to remove the material.”

I got this from USRA last night “Statement Regarding the Removal of
DEI Content from LPI Websites“ which said “After consulting with our
counsel and in a good faith effort to comply with these Administration
directives to the best of our understanding of their terms, USRA/LPI
removed (not deleted) all DEI-related content from the public-facing
websites, which are maintained under USRA’s cooperative agreement with
and grant from NASA.”

Wait a minute: “USRA/LPI removed (not deleted) all DEI-related
content’” Huh? USRA took it offline. It has been deleted from the
website. It is gone. Vanished. Absent. Disappeared. What kind of
Orwellian Double Speak is this? Where is it? But they say “If and when
USRA is advised by an authoritative federal body that we can restore
that content, with or without a disclaimer, USRA will promptly do so.”

USRA still took this material offline with no mention whatsoever in
advance that this was going to happen – or why. Only when everyone
started to notice did they finally decide to admit what they were
doing with a press thing sent out after hours.



5/12/25: IHE.  Can Scientific Research Survive Without Federal
  Funding?  / Universities are offering temporary relief to
  researchers whose projects have been disrupted by federal funding
  cuts. But it won't help in the long term, and experts say industry
  and philanthropy are in no position to make up for the losses.

By  Kathryn Palmer <https://www.insidehighered.com/author/kathryn-palmer>

Colleges and universities are digging into their own pockets to
temporarily support graduate students and faculty in limbo
after the Trump administration’s sudden cancellation—and stalled
review—of billions of dollars in federal research grants.

In February, the Yale School of Medicine began offering temporary
funding to researchers with terminated grants—many related to topics
the Trump administration has deemed unworthy of scientific inquiry,
such as transgender health—to give them time to reorient their
research. Yale’s Graduate School of Arts and Sciences is also
investing $4 million to support graduate students who have lost
training and research grants. Similarly, last month Johns Hopkins
University announced that it is tapping earnings from its $13.2
billion endowment to give researchers $100,000 each for delayed
grants, or $150,000 for terminated grants, during a 12-month
period. And Northwestern University—which hasn’t received any grant
payments from the National Institutes of Health since March—is
offering faculty up to $50,000 to maintain projects for up to one
year.

While institutional funding will help some researchers continue their
work in the short term, experts and research advocates say it’s far from
a long-term solution. And neither is counting on private industry or
philanthropists to step in to sustain the U.S. research enterprise at
the same scale federal grants have done over the past 80 years, experts say.

Over the past several decades, universities have already substantially
increased the amount of money they spend on their own research and
development—from 10 percent of the total in 1970 to 25 percent in 2023,
according to federal data. Meanwhile, federal support for academic
research has been on the decline, falling from 71 percent to 55 percent
during that same timeframe. And support from industry, charities and
other sources have always been marginal, collectively making up about
15 percent of contributions to research funding at colleges and
universities in 2023.

   [It may be that much of the universities' own funds come from
   ID charges on federal grants -- meaning that it's not independent
   of federal support.]


“When it comes to supporting curiosity-driven scientific research, there
is simply no replacement for the federal government,” said Toby Smith,
senior vice president for government relations and public policy at the
Association of American Universities. “While private industry is
critically dependent on the broad-based knowledge and training produced
by university-based research, industry tends to focus their own R&D
efforts on applied research where they can better guarantee a direct
return to the company on their shareholders’ investment.”

Although the Trump administration’s long-range vision for supporting
scientific research remains far from clear, colleges are under immediate
pressure to fill in some of the federal funding craters that have
already upended research—including some clinical trials—on cancer,
diabetes and HIV prevention.

And it’s not just the nation’s wealthiest institutions that are
launching bridge funding efforts.

The Universities of Hawaii, Massachusetts and Arizona have all
announced programs designed to bridge funding gaps and help graduate
students stay on track and finish their dissertations, or faculty
whose research projects are at risk of disruption.


    ‘Fuel’ for the Economic Engine

Soon after faculty at the University of Arizona raised concerns about
cuts to research funding, officials established a Bridge Funding
Investment Program to aid faculty with an established track record of
extramural funding, with a particular focus on preserving
Ph.D. student support. According to Tomás Díaz de la Rubia, senior
vice president for research and innovation, UA—which is still
recovering from a budget crisis, has allocated $1 million in bridge
funding.

While that won’t cover all of the terminated grants, “the bridge has to
go somewhere,” he said, explaining that the program isn’t supporting
projects that don’t have viable alternative long-term funding options.
Instead, “we’re providing funding for projects where the faculty member
has other sources of funding and other proposals with the same or
different federal agencies,” Díaz de la Rubia said. “So far, we’ve been
able to support every request that we’ve received through this process.”

The bridge programs at Arizona and other universities aren’t intended
to indefinitely sustain the academic research enterprise, which is
facing the possibility of even deeper funding cuts. Earlier this
month, President Trump unveiled his budget proposal for Fiscal Year
2026, which includes gutting the budgets for both the NIH and the
National Science Foundation—two of the biggest funders of university
research.

Díaz de la Rubia said UA and other universities are already working with
local, state and federal lawmakers, as well as companies that rely on
university research, to make a case for preserving research funding and
the economic benefit it affords taxpayers.

For every $1 the NIH spent on research funding in 2024, it generated
$2.56 of economic activity, according to a report by United for
Medical Research
<https://www.aau.edu/newsroom/leading-research-universities-report/nih-research-funding-supports-jobs-fuels-us-economy#:~:text=The%20UMR%20report%20underscores%20that,or%20technical%20assistance;%20and%20more.>.

“Congress needs to hear a lot of voices, not just academic voices,” he
said. “Without the fuel for the economic engine, there is no engine. And
universities are that fuel. We are the ones that create those
early-stage discoveries and technologies that get translated into
private sector innovations that drive the economy and provide for
national security.”


    Industry Support ‘Not Realistic’

While big-name technology and pharmaceutical companies bring fully
formed inventions to market, those products are typically derived from
university-led discoveries. For instance, NIH funded-research
contributed to 99 percent
<https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10148199/> of drugs approved
between 2010 and 2019, according to the Center for American
Progress. And many of the components of smartphones, including touch
screens and multi-core processors, have origins in federally funded
university research
<https://www.aau.edu/university-research-made-your-smartphone-smart>.

In 2023, only 6.8 percent of research expenditures in the United States
came from industry, according to data from the Association of University
Technology Managers (AUTM).

“A decline in research funding will result in fewer inventions, which
means fewer innovations will get to market. The pipeline for innovations
is being constrained right now,” said Stephen Susalka, CEO of AUTM,
which supports the development of academic research. And since the cuts
to research funding come on top of broader budget cuts to higher
education institutions, scientists may receive less financial support
for their patent applications, preventing private companies from using
their inventions. “I imagine that in 10 years, there will be fewer drugs
approved than there are today because of these constraints on the front
end,” Susalka said.

Ruth Johnston, vice president of the National Association of College and
University Business Officers, said that expecting the private sector to
support such research in lieu of the federal government may be
“idealistic, but it’s not realistic.” Similarly, philanthropic
organizations likely can’t replace once-stable federal research
support—especially given the market volatility President Trump’s
tariff-driven economic agenda has introduced.

“Because the market is so uncertain right now, philanthropic
organizations are trying to think of their own financial
sustainability,” Johnston said. “They have to be given money from
somebody—are people going to want to give at the same levels as they
were before?”

And while some philanthropic organizations are stepping in to support
research on specific topics —- the Bill Gates Foundation said Thursday
that it plans to spend $200 billion on researching poverty, infectious
diseases and child deaths before it closes in 2045 —- relying on private
donors even when the economy is strong has its drawbacks.

That’s in part because both industry leaders and wealthy do-gooders are
driven by their own financial or personal goals, said Christopher
Newfield, director of research at the Independent Social Research
Foundation in London and professor emeritus of English at the University
of California at Santa Barbara.

“The strength of U.S. research has always been that it is
researcher-driven, by the people who know best, not by moguls with
special interests or axes to grind,” Newfield said in an email. “Firms
take fundamental concepts, materials, discoveries mostly uncovered in
universities and apply them in product lines that they think have high
future value in the marketplace. Usually this needs to be a near-term
future—a couple of years. Fundamental research takes place not over
years but decades.”

But the research enterprise will take much less time to collapse,
Newfield suggested, if Trump’s plans to destabilize the higher education
sector—and especially its research production—come to fruition.

“If the impounding and cuts survive the courts and Congress, then the
U.S. will fall behind Europe and East Asia fairly quickly, within around
five years. Research moves very quickly, even outside of STEM,” he
wrote, adding that cash-strapped universities won’t be able to train as
many future scientists, leaving businesses with a shrunken pool of
workers with advanced skills.

“Since the system’s parts are all interconnected, the general
intellectual level of U.S. higher education will deteriorate on a number
of fronts at the same time.”


    Tough Choices Ahead

Jeffrey Miron, a senior lecturer of economics at Harvard University and
vice president of research at the right-leaning Cato Institute, said
that while some universities are mitigating the short-term impact of
cuts to federal research funding, “there’s almost certainly going to be
a negative impact” if universities lose as much federal support as Trump
has proposed.

And though it will be nearly impossible to replicate federal funding
from another source, the government’s policy shifts will force
universities to reevaluate where sustaining research falls on their list
of priorities.

“They may have various programs, schools, departments, majors or
athletic teams that they will come to decide are not essential,” he
said. “They might be able to partially offset some of the government
funding cuts if they repurpose the money they were spending to maintain
those programs and use that to fund the sciences that are not going to
be easily supported by industry or philanthropic organizations.”

Making such decisions won’t be easy; Columbia University last week
announced 180 layoffs as a result of federal funding cuts, and other
institutions have frozen hiring . But Miron said it could also give
universities more control over their research dollars.

“Accepting federal funding comes with its own costs, where the
government feels it can tell institutions what to do on a whole range of
things, including admissions, hiring, university leadership and how they
deal with campus protests,” he said. “Maybe they would prefer to be a
somewhat smaller enterprise and do fewer things if it means they get
full choice about which things they do and the political positions they
take.”



5/12/25: FYI.  HUGE SHAKE-UP OF NSF BEGINS AS AGENCY MARKS 75TH
ANNIVERSARY

The National Science Foundation turned 75 on Saturday, but
celebrations planned for this week have been marred by a turbulent few
months at the agency and breaking news of a major organizational
shake-up. On Friday, NSF announced it had initiated a Reduction in
Force (RIF) of executive positions across the agency and the
elimination of its Division of Equity for Excellence in STEM. In an
internal memo, viewed by FYI, NSF’s Chief Management Officer Micah
Cheatham stated that the agency currently has space for 143 Senior
Executive Service (SES) positions but has determined that just 59 are
required going forward. The agency plans to reassign SES staff who do
not retain their titles to new roles within NSF by June 30 and lay off
those without “fallback rights.” All staff within the STEM equity
division are subject to the RIF order, with around 15 to 30 employees
thought to have been affected.

The memo also revealed major changes to hundreds of staff known as
rotators — scientists who are temporarily employed by NSF for a few
years at a time under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act in order to
help the agency stay on the cutting edge of research. Over the next 30
days, NSF plans to move IPA rotators out of SES positions “into new,
executive-level positions where they will retain program
responsibility and authority but will no longer supervise federal
employees.” NSF also plans to reduce its temporary workforce from 368
employees to a target of 70 employees. These positions will focus on
“presidential priorities in artificial Intelligence, biotechnology,
nuclear energy, quantum science, and translational science,” according
to the memo.

These actions appear to be connected to broader plans to DISBAND
DISCIPLINE-SPECIFIC DIVISIONS AT THE AGENCY AND DOWNSIZE THE EIGHT
DIRECTORATES, according to reporting by Science. On social media,
current and former NSF staff reacted with dismay at the restructuring
of the agency and the elimination of the STEM equity division. NSF’s
workers union, AFGE Local 3403, also issued a letter calling for the
immediate resignation of Cheatham, arguing that his actions violate
federal law because many functions of the equity division are required
by statute and that he is “clearly more interested in appeasing the
administration than in doing the work directed and funded by
Congress.” In a statement on the division termination, NSF said it “is
mindful of its statutory program obligations and plans to take steps
to ensure those continue.”


From the mentioned 5/8/25 article in Science:

   ...“These actions are necessary … to reduce the size of government
   and reduce federal spending,” according to a memo from Micah
   Cheatham, NSF’s chief management officer. The move is part of a
   plan to radically restructure and downsize the agency, as reported
   yesterday by Science.

   ...That restructuring would abolish NSF’s current 37 divisions spread
   across the agency’s eight directorates. Science has now learned
   that the new structure will retain the existing directorates but
   replace divisions with “clusters” that fund research in the
   president’s five priority areas. Unlike the current divisions,
   which are led by an SES director and an SES deputy director, the
   new clusters will be headed by non-SES supervisors.

   In advance of adopting its new structure, Cheatham announced NSF is
   eliminating the Division of Equity for Excellence in STEM (EES) and
   firing its entire staff, believed to number between 15 and 20. The
   reduction in force, in effect immediately, will be completed by 12
   July.  EES is one of four divisions within NSF’s $1 billion
   education directorate, and last week NSF foreshadowed its demise by
   terminating 331 of its grants. They were seen to be out of step
   with a presidential directive on diversity, equity, and inclusion
   that bans any research that preferentially favors one demographic
   group or excludes participation of other group


From the original 5/8/25 article in Science:

   Exclusive: NSF faces radical shake-up as officials abolish its 37
   divisions / Changes seen as a response to presidential directives on
   what research to fund

   The National Science Foundation (NSF), already battered by White
   House directives and staff reductions, is plunging into deeper
   turmoil. According to sources who requested anonymity for fear of
   retribution, staff were told today that the agency’s 37
   divisions—across all eight NSF directorates—are being abolished and
   the number of programs within those divisions will be drastically
   reduced. The current directors and deputy directors will lose their
   titles and might be reassigned to other positions at the agency or
   elsewhere in the federal government.

   The consolidation appears to be driven in part by President Donald
   Trump’s proposal to cut the agency’s $4 billion budget by 55% for
   the 2026 fiscal year that begins on 1 October. NSF’s decision to
   abolish its divisions could also be part of a larger restructuring
   of the agency’s grantmaking process that involves adding a new
   layer of review. NSF watchers fear that a smaller, restructured
   agency could be more vulnerable to pressure from the White House to
   fund research that suits its ideological bent.

   As soon as this evening, NSF is also expected to send layoff
   notices to an unspecified number of its 1700-member staff. The
   remaining staff and programs will be assigned to one of the eight,
   smaller directorates. Staff will receive a memo on Friday “with
   details to be finalized by the end of the fiscal year,” sources
   tell Science. The agency is also expected to issue another round of
   notices tomorrow terminating grants that have already been awarded,
   sources say. In the past 3 weeks, the agency has pulled the plug on
   almost 1400 grants worth more than $1 billion.

   A spokesperson for NSF says the rationale for abolishing the
   divisions and removing their leaders is “to reduce the number of
   SES [senior executive service] positions in the agency and create
   new nonexecutive positions to better align with the needs of the
   agency.”

   NSF receives more than 40,000 proposals a year, roughly one-quarter
   of which are funded. And division directors wield great authority
   over the outcome. “Although division directors do many things,
   their main job is to concur on grant recommendations,” says one
   former NSF staffer.

   The initial vetting is handled by hundreds of program officers, all
   experts in their field and some of whom are on temporary leave from
   academic positions. After collecting input from outside reviewers,
   program managers pick the strongest proposals and ask their
   division director to concur with their recommendation for
   funding. For all but the biggest grants, the division director’s
   endorsement is the final approval step. That system is unlike the
   one used by the National Institutes of Health, where advisory
   councils for each institute have the final say and rely on ratings
   from a panel of outside experts.


=====

Hate to finally have to say it -- but if anything like this plan
prevails, it looks like the end of good NSF support for astronomy.
Will NRAO survive?  NoirLab?  LSST?  Simon?  No guarantees whatsoever.

Almost certainly the US ELT projects are toast.  
Likely also the ngVLA.  

How can anyone justify such drastic irresponsible and irrational
changes???

=====


5/13/25: NYT, The World Is Wooing U.S. Researchers Shunned by Trump .
  As President Trump guts American research institutions, world
  leaders see a “once-in-a-century brain gain opportunity.”

As President Trump cuts billions of federal dollars from science
institutes and universities, restricts what can be studied and pushes
out immigrants, rival nations are hoping to pick up talent that has
been cast aside or become disenchanted.

For decades, trying to compete with American institutions and
companies has been difficult. The United States was a magnet for top
researchers, scientists and academics. In general, budgets were
bigger, pay was bigger, labs and equipment were bigger. So were
ambitions.

In 2024, the United States spent nearly $1 trillion — roughly 3.5
percent of total economic output — on research and development. When
it came to the kind of long-term basic research that underpins
American technological and scientific advancements, the government
accounted for about 40 percent of the spending.

    [Sorry -- garbled.  Does that mean that the gov. only contributed
    40% of the national funds spent on basic research OR that 40% of
    government research expenditures were for basic research?]

“This is a once-in-a-century brain gain opportunity,” the Australian
Strategic Policy Institute declared, as it encouraged its government
to act.  Last week, at the urging of more than a dozen members, the
European Union announced it would spend an additional 500 million
euros, or $556 million, over the next two years to “make Europe a
magnet for researchers.”

Such a sum is paltry when compared with U.S. budgets. So it’s
understandable if their appeals are met with a request to “show me the
money.”  After all, salaries tend to be much lower in Europe. In
France, for example, a 35-year-old researcher can expect to earn
around €3,600 (about $4,000) a month before taxes, according to the
French Education and Research ministry. A postdoctoral fellow at
Stanford would stand to earn the equivalent of around €6,000 (about
$6,685) a month in the United States.

Still, there is interest. Of 1,600 people who responded to a March
poll in the journal Nature — many of them Ph.D. or postdoctoral
students in the United States — three out of four said they were
considering leaving the country because of the Trump administration’s
policies.

And Europe’s more generous social safety net can make up for a large
part of the salary differential, said Patrick Lemaire, the president
of the College de Sociétés Savantes Académiques de France, an arm of
an international council that represents about 50,000 academics in
France.  “There is much less money in Europe, and the salaries are
much lower,” he said. “But you also have very good social security and
health care, which is free; school and university tuition are free.”


5/15/25: CHED.  Harvard’s Battle With Trump Escalates as Research
Money Is Suddenly Canceled

The battle between Harvard University and the Trump administration
escalated sharply this week, when the administration acted to
terminate billions in federal grants to the university. The roughly
$2.2 billion, which the administration had previously frozen, was
being clawed back grant by grant, in addition to another $450 million
announced this week. In response, the university filed an amended
complaint as part of its legal challenge against the White House.

Unlike other cancellations in recent months targeting research focused
on topics like LGBTQ health, race, or Covid-19, these sweeping
terminations seem unrelated to research content and instead zero in on
the institution at large and its response to campus
antisemitism. Michael Baym, who runs a Harvard Medical School lab
researching antibiotic resistance and bacteriology, was shocked to
receive a notice on Monday evening saying an NIH grant supporting his
lab was terminated.

“I think the reasoning behind this termination had more to do with the
Harvard name as a symbol of elite academia than the content of our
research,” Baym said. “I think this is entirely for symbolic
value. It’s hard to see who in the United States benefits from cutting
medical research.”

The additional terminations exacted a damaging blow to the medical
school. “Nearly all of HMS’s active, direct federal grants have been
terminated” after the university received letters from a slew of
federal agencies this week, Kristin Bittinger, dean for faculty and
research integrity, wrote in an internal HMS memo.

“It is with great regret and sadness that we deliver this deeply
unsettling news,” said the memo, which was also signed by Rachel
Cahoon, chief research administration officer. “These actions by the
federal government are difficult to fully comprehend for all of us
that care deeply about the work of our researchers and the positive
impact their discoveries make on humankind.”

A similar grim message came from the dean of the faculty at Harvard’s
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Andrea Baccarelli. The government
has canceled nearly all of the school’s grants, he wrote in an email
to affiliates, and he said he expects any remaining awards to be
terminated within weeks. Baccarelli added that he and his team would
be restructuring the school’s financial model, a move he described as
a “necessary transition to a more sustainable research enterprise.”

...The additional cuts came a day after Garber issued a letter to
Secretary of Education Linda McMahon refuting the administration’s
claims that Harvard is a partisan institution that has allowed
antisemitism, liberal indoctrination, and race-based discrimination to
fester on its campus. A week prior to that letter, the administration
moved to freeze all future grants to Harvard.  McMahon wrote at the
time that “Harvard should no longer seek GRANTS from the federal
government, since none will be provided.”

...Baym, the bacteria researcher who received a grant-termination
notice Monday evening, posted on the social-media platform Bluesky
that not only was his primary NIH grant terminated, but also his other
major grants, through the National Science Foundation. Those NSF
grants, he learned Wednesday, were on a list of terminated grants sent
to the university, he said.

In a notice sent from NSF’s division of grants and agreements to
Garber on Monday, Jamie H. French, the division director, wrote that
“The agency has determined that termination of certain awards is
necessary because they are not in alignment with current NSF
priorities and/or programmatic goals. NSF understands that Harvard
continues to engage in race discrimination including in its admissions
process, and in other areas of student life, as well as failing to
promote a research environment free of antisemitism and bias.”

Baym also shared a screenshot of the NIH termination notice. His grant
was canceled “due to unsafe antisemitic actions that suggest the
institution lacks concern for the safety and well-being of Jewish
students,” the notice said.



5/19/25: Reader comments from the New York Times obituary for Richard
         Garwin.

Dr. Garwin is just one small example of the priceless wisdom and
knowledge the nation has stored in its community of experts. Imagine
how that wisdom and knowledge has been silenced or worse by the Trump
administration and replaced with the lies and scams of grifters and
crackpots.

Unfortunately, the personal qualities that made Dr. Garwin stand out
aren't universally shared by his fellow scientists - in significant
ways, they're probably the exception to the rule - and today the
Executive Branch is waging an all-out, reckless assault on the
scientific community while our leaders cheerfully hollow out and dumb
down the government agencies that rely on science to protect us.  To
most Americans focused on the stress of daily life and the deliberate
chaos that is being sown from above to envelop us, the dangers
presented by these trends are remote and abstract, if they're paying
any attention at all.  But the fires are being lit, and it's only a
matter of time before we all get burned.



5/21/25: WP As Trump cuts science budgets, some researchers look
  abroad / It’s not clear how many scientists will find work in
  another country, where salaries are generally lower.

     Image: Kartik Sheth, a recently laid-off NASA scientist, arrives
     Friday in France to attend a scientific conference and check out
     the environment for research in the country.

     [Kartik is a former NRAO scientist.]

  By Joel Achenbach, Carolyn Y. Johnson, Karla Adam and Kate Brady

Kartik Sheth, 53, is an astrophysicist and, until a few weeks ago, was
the associate chief scientist at NASA. On March 10, he got an unexpected
email: “I regret to inform you that you are being affected by a
[reduction-in-force] action. … Therefore, you will be separated from
NASA at the close of business on April 10, 2025.”

One of 23 NASA employees laid off that day, including everyone in the
Office of the Chief Scientist, Sheth is now looking for a job —
anywhere. On Friday, he arrived in Paris to attend a conference and
check out the environment for scientific research.

“I don’t know if I’ll find a job in America given the cuts to science,”
he said. “I think we could have a pretty major brain drain in the
country. … I think people are going to start to wonder if this is the
place for me to continue to do science.”

With billions of dollars in research grants eliminated or frozen by the
Trump administration, scientists across America in a broad array of
fields face an uncertain future and the possibility of layoffs. An
untold number like Sheth are looking abroad, thinking of continuing
their careers far from the turmoil here.

While it’s unclear how many will actually make the move, American
scientists are being actively recruited by countries including France,
Spain, Germany and China that are hoping to reverse the flow of
expertise into the United States that has been the norm for decades.

“People who were certain that they were going to spend their careers in
the U.S., and stay in the U.S. for the next phase, are now totally
reconsidering,” said David Baker, a biochemist at the University of
Washington who shared the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 2024.

The United States now faces a “wholesale change in mentality” across the
science community as a result of President Donald Trump’s actions, he said.

At an event at Paris’s prestigious Sorbonne University this month,
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen unveiled a fund of
500 million euros ($560 million) aimed at making the European Union a
“magnet for researchers.” French President Emmanuel Macron — who has
been making a hard push for global talent to “choose France” — pledged
an additional 100 million euros ($112 million) to help researchers
settle in France.

Macron has done this before: In 2017, on the same day the first Trump
administration said it was pulling out of the Paris climate accord,
Macron launched a “Make Our Planet Great Again” initiative, inviting
foreign researchers to live and work in France. This year’s cohort of
60 fellows, who receive monthly stipends and relocation support, will
begin their program in September.

In Germany, Cornelia Woll, president of the Hertie School, a private
social sciences university, was one of eight scholars behind a recent
open letter urging the country’s leaders — through a proposed program
aimed at international academics — to “give America’s top researchers a
new home!”

Woll said she has asked American colleagues, “What can we do for you?”

“The only answer I’ve gotten is: ‘Keep a job open for us in case we lose
our fight,’” she said.

Britain’s Labour Party government is expected to soon announce plans to
spend 50 million pounds ($66 million) to attract and relocate about 10
teams of international researchers, according to an official who spoke
on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak
publicly.

Martin McKee, a professor of European public health at the London School
of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, said he was “hearing from colleagues
that even quite senior professors at American universities are now
applying for more junior posts.”

The interest isn’t only from scientists. The head of a humanities
department at a British university said a recent job posting drew “more
than usual” interest from American academics — including those already
on the tenure track.

In addition to his layoffs and budget cuts, Trump’s immigration policies
have generated consternation in the scientific community because many
researchers — including early-career postdoctoral workers**who will fuel
the next era of innovation — are foreign-born.

According to the National Postdoctoral Association, an advocacy
organization, there are about 72,000 postdocs in the U.S., nearly 60
percent of them from outside the country. Many — both U.S. and
foreign-born — are looking abroad as research funding is hit, said
Thomas Kimbis, chief executive of the association.

Foreign-born postdocs will face uncertainty when their visas end, he
said, making them more likely to start searching immediately for jobs
abroad.

“We want them to be able to stay in the U.S. … We need them, and they’re
giving us a strategic advantage,” Kimbis said.

Working in European countries offers some advantages, such as long
holidays, a year’s maternity leave and free health care. Language is not
an obstacle for Americans, as English has become the working language in
many European laboratories.

There is no comprehensive data on the number of departing
scientists.**But to date, there has been no mass exodus of researchers
and there are plenty of reasons to believe it may not happen. U.S.
laboratories and universities pay more than their European counterparts,
offer more administrative support and arguably convey more professional
prestige.

The facilities in the U.S. are typically impressive. Anand Menon, a
politics professor at King’s College London, said that when he went on a
year-long sabbatical in New York, he felt “like a prince.”

Meanwhile,**many British universities are undergoing funding cuts
themselves.

“American institutions pay very large salaries, which are significantly
higher than those in Europe, in Germany, in France — and here we must
also find flexible solutions,” said Patrick Cramer, president of the Max
Planck Society, one of Germany’s most prominent research organizations.

Almost lost in the concerns about a potential U.S. brain drain is the
fact that science has become globally collaborative. Directives from the
White House can reverberate across the world. Cramer said he fears that
the Trump policies will damage research in Europe.

The U.S. is currently the Max Planck Society’s most significant
international partner, with about 1,000 active collaborations. Climate
science projects are among those most vulnerable to disruption, Cramer said.

“Since the Second World War, American research has been a motor for
science worldwide,” he**said. “And the transatlantic axis in particular
was also important in keeping this engine running. … All of that is now
endangered.”

    ‘Do more..with less’

The U.S. scientific enterprise has traditionally enjoyed bipartisan
political support, with taxpayer dollars flowing generously from federal
agencies to universities and institutions that, in turn, have attracted
brilliant minds from across the planet. In opinion surveys, the
scientific community enjoys higher public trust than many other sectors
of U.S. society.

But Trump is determined to shrink and re-prioritize the functions of the
federal government. The administration’s actions have roiled agencies
across the executive branch — and science and health agencies haven’t
gotten a pass.

Trump’s budget request to Congress proposes large cuts in their funding,
including a 56 percent cut to the National Science Foundation, a nearly
50 percent cut to NASA’s science directorate and a roughly 40 percent
cut to the National Institutes of Health.

The administration has already frozen or cut billions of dollars in
research grants to universities. Some of the cuts are driven by
administration priorities, including terminations of research involving
climate change, covid, vaccines, health disparities and anything deemed
to touch on diversity, equity and inclusion efforts.

In a less obvious but consequential set of bureaucratic maneuvers, the
normal pace of grant reviews and disbursements has slowed to a crawl.
Funding agencies may not be able to get their money out the door by the
end of the fiscal year on Sept. 30.

The administration also stunned the academic world by announcing**a 15
percent cap on overhead costs for research, a move held up in court
battles. Many universities count on a 50 percent or higher formula for
these “indirect costs.” The specter of a major drop in federal funding
is already rippling through universities as they pare back opportunities
for postdoctoral positions, cut internships and, in some cases, lay off
researchers.

“We intend to do more, a lot more, with less,” Health and Human Services
Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. said in testimony May 14**before a House
committee.

The long-term effects of these moves remain unclear. Although the
Republican-controlled Congress has put up minimal resistance to Trump’s
policies, some lawmakers may try to preserve targeted programs that
bring money to their states and districts.

Rep. Rosa DeLauro (Connecticut), the ranking Democrat on the House
Appropriations Committee, spared no words as she addressed Kennedy. She
suggested he has been “promoting quackery” and “endangering the health
of the American people with pseudoscience, fearmongering and
misinformation.”

She added, “China and Europe are taking advantage of this disaster by
recruiting American scientists away from the United States.”

Sheth, the former NASA astrophysicist, grew up in India and came with
his family to the U.S. when he was 14. As a child, he loved “Star Trek”
and dreamed of being a scientist, or even an astronaut. His dream came
true, taking him all the way to NASA, where he worked for nine years,
eight months and 27 days.

He lives in the Navy Yard area of D.C. and has family in New Jersey and
Virginia. He is not eager to leave the country. What he would like most
is to find a job in Washington.

For younger scientists who have yet to build out their networks or put
down as many roots, taking a big leap to a distant land can be easier.

Kevin Bird, 31, is in a pivotal part of his scientific career, studying
plant genomes at the University of California at Davis, supported by a
National Science Foundation postdoctoral fellowship. He long assumed his
next step would be building a laboratory at a university in the U.S.

Then January came.

Without explanation, the Trump administration froze a National Science
Foundation payment system that Bird**and others rely on for their
salaries — a temporary but consequential pause. The growing uncertainty
around science funding meant that the already competitive job market for
a faculty job was tightening as universities slowed hiring.

“I was staring down what I imagine**the next year in the U.S. would look
like,” Bird said. “I was really worried that the tracks were being
ripped up in front of me and there was no short-term future.”

Fortuitously, a postdoctoral position in Bird’s field opened at the Kew
Royal Botanic Gardens in Richmond, England. He applied in February and
will start in July. Bird is searching for an apartment in London for
himself, his wife and two cats.

In a season of despair, particularly for early-career scientists who are
seeing job opportunities freeze or disappear, Bird feels lucky. The job
lasts four years, long enough to build connections in Europe and
determine from afar if American science weathers the storm.

“This is a really good length of time to basically see if the U.S.
settles down and recovers from what happens,” Bird said.


Comments...

Salaries are lower, but housing costs, food costs, costs of living in
general are lower. And the benefits (think health care) are much lower
cost and very high quality. I'm old and retired now, but if I were one
of these young researchers, I'd jump at a chance to be in a place
where science is respected.

I know of three scientists who have already accepted positions in the
EU and the UK. They are quite brilliant and will move the world
forward with their research and work, but could not continue their
work here in the US in this political environment.  Other countries
and the world will continue to benefit from their efforts, but the US
will continue to experience a brain drain under the current
administration.  Trump is doing lasting damage to the USA, that will
be felt for decades to come.

Great, we’re going to lose all of our brilliant minds. And we’re left
with Cabinet Members who dont know what Habeus corpus is.

The dismantling, without public plan or thought, of the nation’s
scientific and engineering enterprise is the most profoundly damaging
and incomprehensible thing that this administration is doing. It’s
mindless…it’s not getting rid of DEI, it’s trying to get government
out of the future business, placing it in private hands.

The future of science is predicated on having PhD students working
hard to earn their PhDs by doing hard science. If the funding goes
away, the best of our young research professors are likely to be
enticed away by either industry jobs or positions at foreign science
institutes. Older, tenured faculty would be left; but without research
funding, graduate students are likely to be shown the door, as their
education has always been supported by the US because it has always
been seen to be in our best interest until the Trump
administration. Who in their right mind is going to apply to go to
grad school in the future under these circumstances?

Science is what made America great after WW2...this move to kill this
is beyond stupid.

Do more with less” Does the American public understand just how much
scientists were already doing with less? American scientists could
give the pentagon a master class in “doing more with less”. The NIH is
the best deal Americans got for their tax dollars while it was still
fully funded.  Now it’s simply not possible to make the magic
anymore. RIP American innovation!

As usual, the Post ignores Canada. On average, Canadian tech
recruiting companies report a 70%--80% increase in US-based inquiries
about jobs in Canada since January. A recent survey by the science
journal Nature found that more than 1,200 of 1,608 (75%) of scientists
polled were considering leaving the US.  And it's not just the tech
sector. Experts in law, engineering and health care are
leaving. Hundreds of US doctors, double the amount year over year,
have made inquiries about moving to Canada.  And it's not just
workers; it's also US and international STEM students and more
fundamentally, the university professors who teach them, who are
looking to move to Canada, given Trump's attacks on US sources and
repositories of fact-based knowledge and real-world expertise. The
University of British Columbia is reporting a 27% increase in graduate
applications from the US over last year.

“We intend to do more, a lot more, with less,” Health and Human
Services Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. said..."  This from a guy who
isn't a medical doctor, not a scientist or researcher and has no idea
what he is talking about. Fing moron!

"The long-term effects of these moves remain unclear."
 -- But are eminently predictable.

You cannot even put a price tag on the loss of key talent like these.
I am not even sure this President has the mental capacity to fully
comprehend these monumental losses, which takes decades and decades to
develop. Our loss is their gain.  We are in effect a nation that is
dumbing down from the lofty heights we reached in the 20th
Century. Many don’t believe in vaccines, don’t believe in basic
science, our kids stay away from math and science because it’s too
hard, all they want to be are rappers, singers, movie stars and
professional basketball players.  These are troubling signs we are
heading in the wrong direction and becoming a Third World country.

Science is about doing the science. A place to work, a community of
colleagues, a sufficient social support system, a living wage,
respect, rationality in the public sphere—these are the necessary
conditions.  Lacking in the US? Just as the cream of the German
science community left that nation in the 30s, the cream in this
nation will go to those places which provide the fertile soil, the
necessary conditions.  Au revoir, US!

The simple reason for the cuts is revenge. Scientists, researchers,
meteorologists, made Trump look like the moron he is. Now he wants to
get even and punish them destroying the future of the country.  In
case you haven’t noticed, Trump is tying to recreate a 50’s economy
that has been dead since the early 50’s when the graduates of all the
GI financed programs hit the economy.

We are preparing the ground for being unable to produce anything but
cheap socks and coal-powered monster trucks, but at least the MAGAs
owned the educated elites.

Republicans are adding $4.5 trillion to the national debt for tax cuts
for the wealthy.  But are cutting scientific research budgets in half
in order to "save money."  Republicans are mentally ill.

t's not a surprise when Nutlick (the Commerce secretary) glories in a
future where American fingers put screws in iPhones. The Trump circus
sees no value in intellectual or scientific pursuits. Our future
generations are doomed.

Look no further than Russell Vought, the Christian Nationalist now
running the Office of Management and Budget for the origin of these
cuts. Evangelical Christians hate science.

** This is such a fiasco. I'm not a scientist or a public servant, just a
citizen who depends on these folks for .... basically all of modern
life?!? I cannot believe a society as innovation rich, as well
defended, as prosperous, and as tech-bedazzled as ours, that has been
coasting on public investments in science for 80 years, would throw
away this inheritance.  And for what?!? Some memes making fun of smart
people?

The smart people are leaving. See ya, Trump-scum, wouldn't want ta be ya.

Trump’s war on science isn’t just policy—it’s national self-sabotage,
a deliberate dismantling of America’s intellectual infrastructure
that’s already driving our brightest minds into exile. The firing of
NASA’s chief scientists, the gutting of NSF and NIH budgets by 50-60%,
and the freeze on critical research grants aren’t fiscal
prudence—they’re ideological arson, burning decades of global
scientific leadership to appease anti-intellectual zealots.


5/22/25: NYT.  Trump Has Cut Science Funding to Its Lowest Level in
Decades / The reporters analyzed 35 years of grants funded by the
National Science Foundation.  [Article captured as PDF file]

The National Science Foundation, which funds much of the fundamental
scientific research at American universities, is awarding new grants
at the slowest pace in at least 35 years.  The funding decreases touch
virtually every area of science — extending far beyond the diversity
programs and other “woke” targets that the Trump administration says
it wants to cut.

That means less support for early-stage research that underpins future
technological advancements — and American competitiveness — in areas
like computer science and engineering; physics and chemistry; climate
science and weather forecasting; and materials and manufacturing
innovations.

It also means less money for undergraduate and graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers and early-career professors — potentially
disrupting the nation’s future scientific work force.

Economists have warned that cutting federal funding for scientific
research could, in the long run, damage the U.S. economy by an amount
equivalent to a major recession.

“These cuts are the height of self-inflicted harm,” said Robert
Atkinson, the president of the Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation, a nonpartisan science and technology policy research
institute. The foundation has argued that China probably already
conducts more research and development than the United States.

...The lag in this year’s funding, more than $1 billion below the
10-year average, is for new research grants, but the Trump
administration has gone further. It has also terminated more than
1,600 active grants for existing research projects, together worth
roughly $1.5 billion (of which at least 40 percent has already been
spent).

And it wants to eliminate nearly $5 billion of the agency’s $9 billion
budget for next year, cutting spending on “climate; clean energy; woke
social, behavioral and economic sciences,” and diversity, equity and
inclusion programs.  Among the in-progress grants that have been
terminated, those focused on education in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics, or STEM, accounted for the vast majority
of the canceled funding. Many of these grants focused on broadening
participation in science and engineering among underrepresented
student groups.

...The N.S.F. said in a statement that while it will focus on the
Trump administration’s priorities — like artificial intelligence,
quantum information science, biotechnology and nuclear energy — it
remains “committed to awarding grants and funding all areas of science
and engineering.”

...Yet the data shows the agency’s funding of new grants at its lowest
level since at least 1990, around when the N.S.F. expanded into its
modern structure. The funding has slowed even further since April 30,
when agency employees were told to stop awarding funds entirely,
according to an email reviewed by The New York Times.

[Tables on awards made so far in 2025 show...

    Physics  -85%
    Math     -72%
    Chem     -57%
    Astron   -53%

    Educ     -80%
    Engr     -57%
    Biol     -52%
    Geosci   -33%
    Compsci  -31%
    Socsci   -29%
    Tech     -20%

      with respect to the 10year average 2015-2024.]

...“There’s total confusion,” said one employee who has worked at the
N.S.F. for more than a decade and is involved in determining which
grants are recommended for funding. The employee, who did not want to
be named out of fear of retaliation for speaking to the news media,
said that the N.S.F.’s rigorous review process had been disassembled,
and that political mandates had taken precedence over scientific
merits when assessing grant proposals.  “There’s confusion on how much
money we can spend,” the employee said. “And then there’s confusion
because the processes are basically paralyzed.”

Comments...

Thank you for publishing this article -- the impact on the sciences has
been an extinction-level event, and it will take years, possibly
decades, to reverse the damage that has already happened.  In my
field, astrophysics, there were about 600 fewer PhD positions offered
nationally this year because of cuts to NSF.  The NSF offered half as
many fellowships supporting PhD students this year as last, across all
fields of science.  Summer research training programs for
undergraduates were cut by about 1/3.  Those students aren't going to
come back to continue their studies in four years (or more) when the
administration changes.  Our graduating students who are serious about
scientific careers are moving abroad at a pace I've never seen before.
They can read the writing on the wall, and the dismal job market
anticipated for this fall.  These cuts are disproportionally hitting
our future -- our students and postdoctoral researchers.  The hits to
facilities are also coming.  We have world-leading facilities, but if
they can't pay the folks to keep them running, they will be mothballed
-- we've seen it before, but the public has a short memory.  We are
rapidly losing our status as world leaders in science, and nobody
seems to have noticed.  Or worse, they have noticed and are cheering
about it.  It's self-destructive madness.

   A country never has enough intellectual horsepower. Importing
   American scientists is like money in the bank.

Having been involved in biomedical scientific research for more than
40 years, my only comment is that termination of grants and cuts to
the budgets of the NIH and NSF will have catastrophic consequences for
our country. Besides the acute effects, these actions signal to
students and trainees considering scientific research as a career they
should consider alternatives. The resulting gaps in the pipeline of
trained personnel have irreversible downstream effects. Fundamental
discoveries will not be made, and biotechnology and pharmaceutical
companies will have fewer leads to pursue for new therapies. Besides
the negative impact on health of this country, the economic
consequences will be substantial. None of the current actions make
sense if the goal of the current administration is to improve health
of our population and remain globally competitive. We cannot rely on
the courts to resolve the current crisis. Congress must stand up and
do its job for the American people.

The problem is the Republican party isn’t just using anti-expert
populism to win votes.  We now are being run by people who do not seem
to understand how our scientific dominance has made us the most
wealthy and powerful nation in the world.  I can’t help but wonder if
the right wing obsession with seeing woke politics in scientific
research has been a deliberate disinformation campaign by our friends
in China and Russia designed to get us to dismantle the engine of our
own prosperity.

Thanks for this. Most Americans have never heard of NSF, but the
research it funds plays a monumental role in every aspect of our
lives.  One of my dear friends, a brilliant scientist and tenured
professor at an R1, is leaving a program officer role at NSF after the
chaos of being required to relocate to DC and then fired, rehired, and
harassed over the last few months...This all trickles down to
universities as a whole, medical centers, surrounding communities,
state governments and infrastructure, and a wide range of private
industries.  It’s not hyperbolic to say that the cuts to science
funding will have catastrophic effects on the American way of life and
the future of humanity.

Not mentioned in this article is how graduate programs in STEM are
rescinding offers of admission. Students are being offered many
thousands of dollars to leave. Principal investigators, whose funding
was already extraordinarily difficult to secure, are finding
themselves unable to continue and uncertain about their futures. Their
institutions’ indirect cost revenues are shriveling overnight, making
just keeping the lights on a challenge. This is happening nationwide
right now at the most elite programs and institutions.  The Trump
administration is taking what ACTUALLY made America great (the world’s
marvel of innovation, creativity, education) and purposefully throwing
it all away. For nothing.

I am a research scientist at a leading university and I can confirm
the outlook is even bleaker than described in this article.  The most
immediate impact of cutting new grants, beyond the science, will be a
dramatic reduction in graduate student and post-doc hiring (this is
happening already).  This will mean a catastrophic disruption in the
training of next generation scientists.

Any sector that is dependent upon innovation is going to be impacted
by these cuts. And the idea that an administration can just wash away
previously legislated spending is simply astonishing. There is no way
that a modern society can function with this level of incoherence,
even more so for what’s left of the “natural” world.

China is thrilled. America just conceded the 21st century.

Because of the decades to millennial long lag between a climate
forcing and our feeling the full effect, due to the thermal inertia of
the ocean and response time of the ice sheets, the effects we are
feeling now are largely just the beginning of the result of emissions
from the 20th century. And emissions have been increasing steadily for
decades.  We are also seeing numerous amplifying feedbacks: loss of
albedo (heat reflectivity) from ice melt, permafrost melt, methane
release and massive wildfires; the Earth is starting to wrest any
possible further human control of the climate away.  We're about out
of time on this, if not already, and leaders are still acting as if
this is not a planetary emergency.

I've been a Biochemistry Faculty member at the University of
Washington since 1967 and have served on multiple NSF and NIH
scientific review panels.  Something the Public, Congress, and DOGE
budget cutters don't realize is that...80-90 percent of applications
for student fellowships and research grants -- despite their general
high quality -- are never funded due to chronically insufficient
funding for these agencies.  The current financial and personnel
decapitation of NSF & NIH are thus depriving the USA of the very best
scientific talent it has now and for the future.  This is an
intellectual and cultural disaster in the making.

Trump slashing science funding is not just neglect, it’s a deliberate
step in a long, dangerous tradition of silencing truth to consolidate
power. History is repeating itself louder, and more shamelessly.

“Trump administration’s priorities — like artificial intelligence,
quantum information science, biotechnology and nuclear energy.”  --
These are all based in math, physics, and chemistry, which is being
cut the most.  The only conclusion that seems reasonable is that the
GoP has been paid off by Putin and Xi to purposefully destroy our
ability to compete.  Without graduates there will be no one to
continue our competitive advantage and the US becomes hollowed out
from within.

I am a retired physician who has witnessed, sometimes with amazement,
the massive advances in medical science since I graduated from med
school in 1978.  I have my father’s medical school notes (1945) also,
so I can compare what was known then.  In 1945 there was substantially
knowledge about anatomy, neuroanatomy, basic biochemistry, physiology
and pathology, but almost no effective treatments. Penicillin was
first used in the US in 1942.

  [cont] What has changed, in living memory, is massive new
  understanding of immunology and disease pathology, along with
  miraculous new treatments, especially in oncology and heart disease.
  Patients with large heart attacks were doomed when I was a medical
  student. Now they go home the next day.  Most diabetics lost at
  least one limb before they went blind and then died of renal
  failure. I have not had a patient loose a limb or go blind in
  decades. Metastatic melanoma was a death sentence as recently as
  1995. Now with immunotherapy, many patients are cured. I can go on
  and on and on!

  [cont] All of this was only made possible by federal biomedical
  research funding. The budgets cuts (40% at NIH and 50% at NSF) and
  program elimination (for example closing the CDC Cancer Prevention
  Office) are irrational and psychotic. People like Cruz and other GOP
  politicians who vote for this insanity should have to revert back to
  1945 medical therapy when they get sick.

As someone who has spent his entire 50+ year career working in
technology industries, I can state categorically that this is the
single worst decision in that entire period.  Research funding has
waxed and waned over that time but always with some understandable
rationale.  This decision was made without any consideration of the
consequences, which will be felt for generations to come.  Add this to
the list of things that will wipe out the Republican majorities in
Congress in 2026.

Congratulations President Trump.  In 100+ days you have ransacked
scientific research in the US, reducing it from the international
powerhouse and leader we have been since WWII, to just another country
struggling to get funding for projects.  You may call it "America
First," but having laid waste to STEM research, we are now "America
Last."

NSF and NIH supported the most successful scientific ecosystem by
peer-reviewed grant funding.  The saddest quote in this article for
me: "N.S.F.’s rigorous review process had been disassembled, and that
political mandates had taken precedence over scientific merits when
assessing grant proposals."  We will feel this loss for decades.

If the country is aiming to be uncompetitive, focusing on a
Soviet-style aging, isolated, and destructive economy, this is a good
start.



5/22/25: 

Date: Thu, 22 May 2025 17:32:02
From: FYI <fyi@aipcomm.org>
Subject: NSF Adds DEI and Israel Boycott Restrictions to Grant Terms

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN
May 22, 2025

NSF Adds DEI and Israel Boycott Restrictions to Grant Terms

The restrictions apply to all new grants and amendments to existing
ones.  A composite image of pages from NSF's new grant policy overlaid
atop an image of the Foundation's HQ.

Pages from the National Science Foundation’s new grant policy. NSF /
AIP The National Science Foundation updated its grant conditions on
Monday to bar recipients from operating certain diversity, equity, and
inclusion programs or participating in boycotts of Israel. The move
follows a similar policy issued by the National Institutes of Health
last month.

The new conditions state that accepting an award from NSF means the
recipient is certifying that it does not operate any programs that
“advance or promote DEI, or discriminatory equity ideology in
violation of federal anti-discriminatory laws,” nor will it boycott
organizations with Israeli ties. NSF reserves the right to terminate
funding to recipients it deems to be in violation of the policy.

The policy applies to all new NSF grants and funding amendments to
existing grants, agency spokesperson Michael England said in a
statement. England did not comment on what types of programs would
violate the policy.

The new conditions reference an executive order from President Donald
Trump in January that defines “discriminatory equity ideology” as “an
ideology that treats individuals as members of preferred or disfavored
groups, rather than as individuals, and minimizes agency, merit, and
capability in favor of immoral generalizations.” This includes the
belief that “an individual, by virtue of the individual’s race, color,
sex, or national origin, should be discriminated against or receive
adverse treatment to achieve diversity, equity, or inclusion,” the
order adds.

No definition is provided for programs that “advance or promote DEI”
in a way that would violate anti-discrimination laws.

“The unfortunate thing here is that the administration hasn’t done
much to specifically define what they believe would be an unlawful DEI
program,” said Posi Oshinowo, a labor and employment attorney at Wiley
Rein. Another executive order directed the attorney general and
secretary of education to issue guidance by May 21 regarding
compliance with the Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard ruling by
the Supreme Court that race-conscious admissions are unlawful, but
that guidance has not been issued yet, Oshinowo added.

“There are limited glimpses available as to what the administration
views as unlawful,” Oshinowo said. A letter from the Department of
Education in February asserts that the ruling in SFFA v. Harvard
“should actually extend to virtually all aspects of how educational
institutions operate. So not just admissions, but hiring,
compensation, financial aid, scholarships, prizes, administrative
support, discipline, housing, graduation ceremonies, and all other
aspects of student, academic and campus life,” Oshinowo said.

“It takes the position as well that even race-neutral programs could
be unlawful discrimination if they are motivated by racial
considerations. One of the things they specifically call out is using
essays or writing samples or extracurricular activities to try to
predict, or solicit without soliciting, a student’s race,” Oshinowo
added.

Additionally, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the
Department of Justice issued guidance in March that identifies
unlawful DEI practices, including programs that use race, gender, or
sexual orientation as an eligibility factor; quotas, including
aspirational goals tethered to compensation for hiring managers or
leadership; affinity groups, except where groups are open to all and
can be created by anyone; mandatory minimum slate requirements, such
as a requirement to consider 30% “diverse” candidates in a candidate
pool; and “discriminatory training.”

DEI restrictions implemented by other grantmaking agencies have been
challenged in court. For instance, a grant condition restricting DEI
activities for Department of Housing and Urban Development grantees is
currently subject to a temporary restraining order. The judge wrote
that the conditions likely exceed the department’s constitutional
authority, are not closely related to the purposes of the grants, and
are likely void due to vagueness.

The ban on boycotts of Israel is more clear because the conditions
document provides a definition, Oshinowo said. “It also seems to be a
pretty clear response to the demands of student protesters during the
recent protests related to university support of Israel,” he
added. “So it’s sort of an anti-capitulation obligation imposed there
by the administration on universities and institutions that receive
grants.”

The Trump administration has demonstrated a willingness to terminate
individual grants and cut off funding to entire institutions by
invoking conduct relating to DEI or Israel.

NSF has already terminated more than a thousand grants it deemed
related to DEI or other topics, such as misinformation and
environmental justice, that do not “effectuate” agency priorities. NSF
and several other science agencies also cut off funding to Harvard
University on May 12, with NSF’s termination letter asserting that
Harvard “continues to engage in race discrimination including in its
admissions process, and in other areas of student life, as well as
failing to promote a research environment free of antisemitism and
bias.”

Harvard filed a lawsuit alleging that the funding freezes and
terminations go beyond the scope of agencies’ anti-discrimination
procedures by targeting research programs that are not connected to
the alleged discrimination.

In total, NSF has terminated more than 1,750 grants since the
beginning of the administration, according to a new spreadsheet
published by the agency.



5/22/25: 

Date: Thu, 22 May 2025 14:44:38
From: FYI <fyi@aipcomm.org>
Subject: What’s in Store for Science in Republicans’ Reconciliation Bill

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN
May 22, 2025
What’s in Store for Science in Republicans’ Reconciliation Bill
Lindsay McKenzie

The bill could have major implications for defense, energy, and
industrial R&D.  

House Republicans are advancing tax breaks for private R&D, large cuts
to clean energy programs, and higher taxes on college endowments as
part of their budget reconciliation bill for fiscal year 2025. A major
spending boost for defense is also included in the bill, as well as
plans to restart federal auctions of electromagnetic spectrum bands.

The House passed the “One Big Beautiful Bill” early Thursday in a
215-214 vote after a 42-page manager’s amendment helped to win over
several Republican holdouts. Under the reconciliation process, the
bill will now proceed to the Senate where it may be passed with a
simple majority vote, circumventing the need for Democratic
support. Senate Republicans are expected to produce their own version
of the legislation.

Any budget changes in the bill will be separate from the annual
discretionary budget process.

  Tax changes

The House’s bill would reintroduce tax rules allowing companies to
fully deduct domestic research costs in the year they occurred, a move
that has been endorsed by many companies and universities that partner
with them. This provision would reverse a rule introduced in the 2017
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that requires companies to spread the deduction
of R&D costs over five years. (That rule took effect in 2022.)

The bill also would modify the current 1.4% endowment tax on some
private colleges and universities’ net investment income to introduce
a tiered system of rates, with a top rate of 21% for institutions with
endowments exceeding $2 million per student. In addition, the bill
would eliminate several tax breaks for non-profit organizations,
including an exemption on taxes for non-publicly funded research
income. Higher education advocacy groups such as the Association of
American Universities have opposed these changes.

  Increased military spending

The bill would provide a $150 billion boost to defense spending, of which $24.7
billion is for construction of the “Golden Dome” missile defense shield that
President Trump proposed back in January. To support this endeavor, the bill
contains $18.8 billion for “next-generation missile defense technologies,”
including $7.2 billion for the development and procurement of military
space-based sensors, $5.6 billion to develop space-based and phase intercept
capabilities, and $250 million for development of directed energy capabilities.
Supporting innovation and enhancing commercial technology for military use are
mentioned multiple times throughout the bill. Under a section on enhancing DOD
resources for scaling low-cost weapons into production, the bill includes $2
billion for expanding the Defense Innovation Unit, a $1 billion boost for
“programs to accelerate the procurement and fielding of innovative
technologies,” $250 million for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s
Quantum Benchmarking Initiative, and $120 million for development of small
modular nuclear reactors for military use...

  Big cuts to clean energy

The bill would significantly restrict or eliminate many of the clean energy
incentives introduced by President Joe Biden as part of the Inflation Reduction
Act, including clean energy tax credits, advanced manufacturing tax credits,
Environmental Justice Block Grants, and the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund.
Multiple Department of Energy offices would see unobligated funding rescinded if
the bill passes unaltered, including the Loan Programs Office, the Office of
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, and the Office of Policy, among others.

  Authorizing spectrum auctions

The bill would restore the Federal Communications Commission’s spectrum auction
authority, with the hope of raising $88 billion by 2034 through sales of 600
megahertz of spectrum. At present, the funds would be used to offset the costs
of other provisions of the legislation. Democrats’ suggestions to spend the
funds on specific federal programs were voted down during committee amendments.
Sen. Maria Cantwell (D-WA) has in the past proposed using auction funds to
support science programs authorized by the CHIPS and Science Act, but this
option no longer appears to be on the table.


5/23/25: 
From: Van Scoyoc Associates <kmorrison@vsadc.com>
Subject: Washington Week in Science - May 23, 2025

A Weekly Update of Science Policy News and Select Funding Opportunities

 
FDA significantly limits COVID-19 vaccine recommendations The US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) announced this week it will only recommend COVID-19
vaccines for adults 65 and older and people at risk for severe illness. In a
marked departure from the current recommendations of seasonal vaccination for
anyone 6 months and older, the FDA will require manufacturers to conduct
clinical trials demonstrating the efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines for healthy
children and adults under age 65. Writing in the New England Journal of
Medicine, FDA Commissioner Martin Makary, MD, MPH, and Vinay Prasad, MD, MPH,
director of the FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, said the
move aligns the United States with other high-income nations that have limited
vaccine access to older and vulnerable populations. Read more:  CIDRAP
 
Young adults see alarming spike in 14 types of cancer, NIH report reveals
Researchers at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) have uncovered some
important trends in cancer cases across the United States. Between 2010 and
2019, they found that 14 types of cancer became more common among people under
the age of 50. Among these were several well-known types, including breast
cancer and colorectal cancer. Interestingly, nine of the rising cancer types
also showed increases in some people over 50. Read more:  SciTechDaily

CDC accepts recommendations for chikungunya vaccines The U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention has accepted its advisory panel's recommendations
on vaccines for chikungunya, a virus transmitted by mosquitoes. Read more: 
Reuters

                                    Defense

Defense Department caps indirect research cost rates for universities The
Department of Defense is planning to cap indirect cost reimbursement rates for
higher education institutions at 15 percent, according to a May 14 memo signed
by Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth. The memo directs the DOD to develop the
new policy within 21 days, marking the fourth federal agency—including the
National Institutes of Health, the Department of Energy and the National Science
Foundation—that has enacted a plan to cap indirect cost rates at 15 percent.
Read more:  Inside Higher Ed

DOD’s tech agency braces for 10% workforce cut The Pentagon’s IT agency will
lose nearly 10 percent of its total staff as part of the Trump administration’s
push to slash the federal workforce, the agency’s director told senators
Wednesday. But the workforce reduction may have its upsides. “It's giving us an
opportunity to ruthlessly realign and optimize how we are addressing what is an
evolving mission,” Lt. Gen. Paul Stanton, director of the Defense Information
Systems Agency, said during a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing on May 21.
Read more:  Defense One

Trump unveils plans for $175B 'Golden Dome' missile defense shield President
Donald Trump on Tuesday unveiled plans to begin building a sophisticated new
missile defense shield that could intercept threats from space, estimating the
endeavor would cost some $175 billion and become operational in three years. The
project "Golden Dome," which will be led by Space Force Gen. Michael Guetlein,
echoes President Ronald Reagan's failed "Star Wars" program, which was
criticized for being overly ambitious and siphoning money away from other
national priorities. The White House cited advancements in technology as a
reason why some of Reagan's vision was now possible. Read more:  ABC News


                                     Energy

Federal judge blocks Energy Department’s 15% cap on indirect research costs A
federal judge granted a preliminary injunction blocking the U.S. Department of
Energy from instituting a 15% cap on reimbursement for colleges’ indirect
research costs. A group of universities and higher education associations sued
the department in April, alleging it had overstepped its authority in
implementing the policy and applying the change retroactively by terminating
grants with reimbursement rates above the cap. In her ruling last week, U.S.
District Judge Allison Burroughs agreed with the plaintiffs’ arguments and said
they are likely to succeed in proving the Energy Department’s funding cap is
“arbitrary and capricious” and violates federal law. Read more:  Higher Ed Dive

                                     Space

 NASA says long-running budget shortfalls may lead to ISS crew and research
reductions NASA says a “multi-year” budget shortfall even before the proposed
cuts in the fiscal year 2026 budget request have led the agency to consider
reductions in crew size and research on the International Space Station. At a
May 20 press conference about the upcoming Ax-4 private astronaut mission to the
station, Dana Weigel, NASA ISS program manager, was asked about language in the
top-level fiscal year 2026 budget proposal that seeks to reduce spending on the
ISS by half a billion dollars, part of $6 billion in overall cuts to the agency.
Read more:  Space News

NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab ending telework policy for over 1,000 employees NASA's
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) has told more than 1,000 telework employees they
must return to on-site work. The move effectively ends remote work at JPL, which
had been a fixture at the Pasadena, California lab since the pandemic. Employees
were notified via email Thursday that an end to telework would take effect on
Aug. 25 for general employees within California, and Oct. 27 for teleworkers
living outside the state. Read more:  Space.com

Space Force, NGA reach agreement on purchasing power for commercial ISR Top
officials from the Space Force and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
signed a memorandum of agreement Wednesday that delineates how the organizations
will share duties for buying space-based intelligence from commercial providers.
Read more:  DefenseScoop

                   Fundamental Science and Engineering

Trump has cut science funding to Its lowest level in decades The National
Science Foundation, which funds much of the fundamental scientific research at
American universities, is awarding new grants at the slowest pace in at least 35
years. Among the in-progress grants that have been terminated, those focused on
education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, or STEM,
accounted for the vast majority of the canceled funding. Many of these grants
focused on broadening participation in science and engineering among
underrepresented student groups. The N.S.F. said in a statement that while it
will focus on the Trump administration’s priorities — like artificial
intelligence, quantum information science, biotechnology and nuclear energy — it
remains “committed to awarding grants and funding all areas of science and
engineering.” Yet the data shows the agency’s funding of new grants at its
lowest level since at least 1990, around when the N.S.F. expanded into its
modern structure. The funding has slowed even further since April 30, when
agency employees were told to stop awarding funds entirely, according to an
email reviewed by The New York Times. Read more:  New York Times

Trump’s science adviser defends funding cuts as a chance to ‘revitalize’ U.S.
science Michael Kratsios, science adviser to President Trump, sent a blunt
message to the U.S. research community, saying the community needs to learn how
to thrive with less money from the federal government. Speaking to a  gathering
at the National Academy of Sciences building, the former tech executive said the
Trump  administration’s termination of billions of dollars in federal grants and
its proposal to slash agency budgets next year should prompt the science
community to rethink its priorities. Read more:  Science  

As it awaits a court ruling, NSF pauses attempt to cap indirect-cost payments on
research grants The US National Science Foundation (NSF) has paused a policy
that threatened to cost universities hundreds of millions of dollars a year in
‘research overhead’ payments. The suspension, announced last Friday,
follows freezes of similar policies at the US National Institutes of Health
(NIH) and the US Department of Energy (DoE). The NSF announced on 2 May that it
would cap overhead payments on new research grants at 15% and was swiftly
sued by a coalition of 13 US universities and 3 academic associations seeking to
stop the policy. The newly announced pause will last until 13 June, when a judge
will hear the case. Read more:  Nature


5/23/25:  Caltech email

To: The Caltech Community

From: Thomas F. Rosenbaum, President
      David A. Tirrell, Provost

Date:  May 23, 2025

Re:  Your Support of Caltech Research and Education

The U.S. House of Representatives this week passed legislation that
proposes to dramatically expand a tax on university endowments. If
enacted, it would jeopardize funding that is invested directly in our
mission to advance world-leading research and to educate tomorrow’s
STEM leaders for the benefit of society.  

The House proposal implements a tiered tax structure, ranging from 1.4
percent to 21 percent, on the annual investment income that Caltech
and other universities across the country generate from long-term,
permanent investments from donors. At Caltech, a tax of this
proportion would result in an annual loss of tens of millions of
dollars in funding, endangering one of the Institute’s primary revenue
sources. Endowment revenue supports student financial aid and is
invested in the Caltech faculty, facilities, and research and
education programs that help make the U.S. a global leader in science,
engineering, and innovation. Furthermore, the House bill undermines
our ability to maintain the current level of private funding that is
necessary to continue to deliver on the high level of excellence in
research and education that our community experiences today.

We write to bring to your attention that this bill will be discussed
next in the Senate, and to ask you to make the case for Caltech’s
research and teaching mission to your networks and your elected
representatives. Now, more than ever, it is important that we all make
clear to the Senate and to our representatives that if this provision
remains in the final tax bill it will have a fundamentally damaging
impact on private colleges and universities – and their students –
across the country.

Our endowment, which has been nurtured over decades through the
collection and strategic management of individual donations, is
allocated to support Caltech’s research and education every day.

 * Over the past five years, Caltech’s endowment has made possible
    $200 million in cumulative investment in student financial aid—an
    investment that is critical to our ability to practice 100%
    need-blind admissions, which means that domestic students are
    admitted to Caltech without consideration of their financial need,
    and ensures that more than 75% of our students graduate from
    Caltech debt-free.

 * Furthermore, this past year, with confidence in the long-term
    stability of the endowment as a foundation for planning, the
    Institute expanded its financial commitment to undergraduate
    students and their families. Beginning with the fall 2025 incoming
    class, students with family incomes of $200,000 or less receive
    offers of financial aid packages that cover the full cost of
    tuition, while students with family incomes of less than $100,000
    receive offers of grant aid packages that cover the full cost of
    tuition, fees, housing, and food.

 * Simultaneously, Caltech has used annual allocations from the
    endowment to attract and retain leading faculty across fields of
    study and to support them in the launch of new and continuing
    research endeavors, such as projects that demonstrate the
    viability of seismic technology as a tool for measuring ground
    water, that pioneer novel autonomous systems and technologies, and
    that have led to an interdisciplinary effort to harvest solar
    power in space and transmit it back to a receiver on Earth.

We are grateful to our donors who over decades have generously
invested in Caltech, in our research, and importantly in our people
because of a shared commitment and belief in our mission. The
financial resources generated from their investments, which we have
been fortunate to grow over time, are essential to our ability to
advance research and education that enhances well-being, drives
innovation, and supports U.S. leadership in science and
engineering. We take seriously our responsibility to deliver a public
good and allocate the private resources we have been gifted and
stewarded to that end.   

As Caltech’s president and provost, we advocate continually for the
value of Caltech’s contributions to society and join with other
Caltech senior leaders and alumni and friends to communicate how we
realize our mission and the importance of this work to economic
development, job creation, public health, and national security,
impacting the success of communities across the country.    The next
few weeks are a critical period in which you can add your voice to the
conversation. The House bill will go before the Senate to be
discussed, debated, and potentially amended. If the Senate approves
the bill with modifications from its current version, the Senate and
House will need to reconcile any difference and agree on one final
proposal before the bill becomes law. This means that we have a
concentrated window to advocate for the importance of science and
discovery, of research and the value of the investment in students’
education, and of the contributions that we make every day at Caltech
to tackle the world’s most complex challenges. I encourage you to
contact your senators [caltech.us11.list-manage.com] and to urge them
to reject the endowment tax increase and any such provision that would
cripple our ability to deliver world-class education and research.

Please share the following important information with your elected
representatives:

 * The endowment tax places more financial burden on students by
    making universities less affordable and less equipped to
    contribute to our economic prosperity, public health, and national
    security. Taxing schools reduces the revenue available for
    financial aid, a primary use of the endowment. 

 * Colleges and universities manage endowments responsibly. Caltech
    relies heavily on its endowment to support its integrated research
    and education mission. Of the $211 million drawn from the
    endowment in FY 2024, 90 percent of the funds were invested in
    financial aid and fellowships or research and teaching endeavors.

 * The endowment tax will undermine the country’s global leadership in
    technology and innovation.

 * America’s universities lead the curiosity-driven research that has
    led to transformative new technologies and innovations that define
    our lives, from artificial intelligence to the ability to sequence
    the human genome, to pioneering chip design that has allowed for
    smartphones, personal computers, and other electronic devices. The
    work from laboratories at Caltech and America’s other universities
    has profoundly changed our world and has the potential to continue
    to drive future innovations and advancements.


5/28/25: WP.  RFK Jr. says he may bar scientists from publishing in
  top medical journals / Health Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. took
  aim at reputed journals such as the Lancet and said his agency will
  create “in-house” publications instead.

Health and Human Services Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. said Tuesday
that he may bar government scientists from publishing in the world’s
leading medical journals, instead proposing the creation of “in-house”
publications by his agency — the latest in the Trump administration’s
attacks on scientific institutions.

“We’re probably going to stop publishing in the Lancet, New England
Journal of Medicine, JAMA and those other journals because they’re all
corrupt,” Kennedy said during an appearance on the “Ultimate Human”
podcast. He also described the journals as being under the control of
pharmaceutical companies.

The three journals he named, all established in the 1800s, publish
original, peer-reviewed research and play a central role in
disseminating medical findings worldwide. JAMA, published by the
American Medical Association, and the Lancet each say they receive
more than 30 million annual visits to their sites, while the New
England Journal of Medicine says it is read in print and online by
more than 1 million people each week.

...Kennedy also accused several agencies under the Department of
Health and Human Services — including the National Institutes of
Health, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Food and
Drug Administration, and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services — of being “sock puppets” for the pharmaceutical industry.

On his plans for the department to create its own journals, Kennedy
said they would “become the preeminent journals, because if you get
[NIH] funding, it is anointing you as a good, legitimate scientist.”

Adam Gaffney, a public health researcher and an assistant professor at
Harvard Medical School, wrote in an email that “banning NIH-funded
researchers from publishing in leading medical journals and requiring
them to publish only in journals that carry the RFK Jr. seal of
approval would delegitimize taxpayer-funded research.”


Comments...

Hold on a second... I just noticed this... does the blurb below this
article's headline really read "reputed" rather than "reputable?!?!"

Where is the voice of the AMA in protest? Why are they not pointing
out that for all intents and purposes RFK, Jr is practicing medicine
without a license to the detriment of the entire country?  The AMA and
all professional medical organizations should demand that RFK, Jr
resign.

Kennedy knows that no reputable scientific journal will publish his
hand picked hacks' pseudo-scientific "studies" linking autism and
vaccines, so he is going to set up a scientistic vanity press to do so
on his behalf.  U.S. science is becoming an arm of government policy
and ideology, not honest sicentfic inquiry. This is how we end up
looking like the old Soviet Union in its absurd embrace of Lamarkian
evolution.

George Orwell is beginning to look like a prophet, not just a
brilliant novelist.  The whole idea of science is independent,
unbiased observation and experimentation, uninfluenced by ideology or
preconception.  RFK Jr. is right that private industry has too much
self-interested influence over what research gets done and
(occasionally) on how ambiguous results are interpreted. But the
solution is *more* government spending on research suggested by
independent, non commercial scientists and published in independent,
well-established scientific journals. Setting up a government party
line for determining what research to fund and for vetting research
results is the wrong approach entirely.

...if he can actually prevent federally funded researchers from submitting
articles to respected journals (can he?), that will undermine their
careers.

This just continues to get more appalling by the day; as a healthcare
provider/educator I don't even know what to say anymore except the
Nazis are not at the door: they are IN THE HOUSE.

It’s almost like putting a junkie in charge of HHS was a bad idea.

Journals like the Lancet are world renowned and respected. I wish I
could say the same about RFK




5/30/25: Science.  Final NSF budget proposal jettisons one giant
telescope amid savage agencywide cuts / Trump’s 57% proposed cut to
agency would drop grant success rates to 7% and gut education and
training

...Following up on the “skinny budget” unveiled on 2 May, the White
House’s full NSF budget request to Congress for the 2026 fiscal year
would all but doom one of two proposed giant telescopes, eliminate
funding for the U.S. global change research program and research on
clean energy technologies, and close half of a pioneering
gravitational wave observatory whose data on black hole mergers
produced a Nobel Prize. The NSF budget proposal would also reduce by
two-thirds the agency’s investment in training the next generation of
U.S. scientists and engineers and eviscerate its $1.4 billion
portfolio to increase the diversity of that workforce.

“The $3.9 billion request reflects a strategic alignment of resources
in a constrained fiscal environment in which NSF prioritizes
investments that can have the greatest national impact,” according to
a statement from an agency spokesperson. (Computer scientist
Sethuraman Panchanathan abruptly resigned as NSF director last month;
he’s been replaced on an acting basis by his former chief of staff,
Brian Stone.)

The president’s budget, which requires congressional approval, would
deliver a crushing blow to the many thousands of academic researchers
who depend on NSF funding. Their recent one-in-four chance of winning
a grant would plunge to a minuscule 7%, turning the already
competitive review process into a near-lottery. The number of
scientists supported by an NSF grant would contract by three-quarters,
as would the number of elementary and secondary school students and
their teachers. NSF’s prestigious CAREER program, which gives 5-year
grants to hundreds of young investigators, would disappear.

Trump’s budget would even slash many of the areas his administration
has identified as national priorities. NSF’s investment in research on
advanced manufacturing, for example, would dip by 65%,
microelectronics research would fall by 54%, and NSF’s support for
biotechnology would drop by 30%. Research on artificial intelligence
(AI) and quantum information science (QIS) are the only priority areas
that would be protected, with AI getting a 3% boost and QIS holding
steady.

Although those cuts were foreshadowed in Trump’s partial budget,
today’s 225-page proposal contains some surprises. It doesn’t call for
the massive layoffs that many scientists had feared. Instead, NSF’s
1550-person workforce would shrink by 15%, the document says. At the
same time, the number of academic scientists on leave from their
institutions for assignments of 2 to 4 years at NSF would drop from
300 to 70. Those people, known as rotators, have traditionally been
the sources for the dozens of new initiatives that NSF launches each
year to address pressing research questions.

Trump has also unexpectedly preserved the agency’s account for
building new facilities, after removing funding for it from the 2025
NSF budget that Congress finalized in March. The 2026 request would
provide $251 million for major facilities, some $201 million of which
would be used to complete work on a $500 million supercomputer at the
University of Texas at Austin. NSF’s long-delayed renovation of its
main Antarctic research stations would continue to move at a crawl,
getting $25 million in 2026 rather than the $60 million NSF had
previously planned on spending for each of the next several years.

And the astronomical community will be stunned that the agency intends
to wind down one of the sites for the celebrated Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), now operating from twin
locations in Louisiana and Washington state. The observatory rely on
both sites working together to confirm detections of waves and data
from each, combined with information from international counterparts,
are used to localize the waves' celestial sources.

In the budget request, NSF also says it will back only one of the two
$3 billion optical telescopes that the astrophysics community wants to
build. That honor goes to the Giant Magellan Telescope already under
construction in Chile. Its competitor, the Thirty Meter Telescope
(TMT), “will not advance to the Final Design Phase and will not
receive additional commitment of funds from NSF,” according to the
budget request.

NSF’s oversight body, the National Science Board, had recommended the
agency spend $1.6 billion on one of the telescopes. But the budget
warns GMT’s backers, a consortium of 15 institutions, that “moving
into the final design phase does not guarantee a project will be
approved for construction, and doing so does not obligate the agency
to provide any further funding.”

   [Doesn't mention LSST]



5/30/25:  On Facebook:  From Fred Rasio

"Given the unaffordability of continuing funding two different
multi-billion dollar telescopes, NSF will advance the Giant Magellan
Telescope (GMT) into the Major Facility Final Design Phase, but the
Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) will not advance to the Final Design
Phase and will not receive additional commitment of funds from
NSF. NSF has received assurances from the GMT project that it can
complete the final design phase without further investments. Moving
into the final design phase does not guarantee that a project will be
approved for construction, and doing so does not obligate the agency
to provide any further funding. The FY 2026 Request supports continued
design of a single telescope within the U.S. Extremely Large Telescope
(ELT) program."

    [Finally! ... a decision has been forced.  Only a decade too late.
    It's only happening now because Trump intends decimate NSF.  Even
    with a sensible decision, the likelihood of a US ELT is probably
    below 30%.  We'll be lucky if NRAO and NOIRlab survive.

    As in a number of other bad outcomes influenced by politics, the
    demise of TMT was facilitated by a dire convergence between
    right-wing ignorance and cruelty and left-wing stupidity here. ]


Comments...

   Brian Siana: TMT US partners are primarily in California. Hard not
   to wonder if that played a role.  Also, they want to shut down one of
   the two LIGO sites, because why would you need two sites? Efficiency!!

       [Siana is at UC Riverside.  But, no, the main reason NSF would
       choose GMT is that it is years ahead of TMT in terms of site
       infrastructure.  It's regrettable that GMT isn't in the
       northern hemisphere, but the South is better than nothing.]

   Chien-Hsiu Lee: NSF said the same thing in FY25, and the congress
   came back and said they want two:
   https://aas.org/.../fy25-senate-funding-bill-nasa-and-nsf...


5/30/25: AAS.  Scientific Societies Issue Letter to Congress Regarding
National Science Foundation Reorganizations and Cuts

  A coalition of professional societies and organizations whose
  members conduct research in fields supported by the National Science
  Foundation (NSF) today issued a letter to the United States
  Congress. The letter expresses support for the NSF and concern about
  recent organizational and financial developments at the agency.

  The NSF has a 75-year successful record of driving groundbreaking
  innovations and landmark achievements through its support of basic
  research and education in the non-medical sciences and
  engineering. Recently, the agency has experienced abrupt
  reorganizations and reductions in force, plans to reduce its scope,
  abrupt cancellation of existing grants, and devastating proposed
  cuts to its future budget.

  The letter, which is initially endorsed by more than 50 signatories,
  calls on the leaders of the US Senate Committee on Commerce,
  Science, and Transportation and the US House Committee on Science,
  Space, and Technology to exercise their oversight authority to
  investigate those developments.

  The full text of the letter and the initial signatories can be found here: 

      Letter addressed to the leadership of the authorizing committees
      with oversight over NSF (PDF)

       https://aas.org/sites/default/files/2025-05/Letter%20Regarding%20NSF%20from%20Scientific%20Organizations.pdf

  Organizations interested in joining the letter are invited to
  contact the American Astronomical Society’s Deputy Director of
  Public Policy, Roohi Dalal, at roohi.dalal@aas.org.


5/30/25:  NasaWatch.  Here's That Wonderful NASA Budget News

  Janet Petro's latest Embrace the Challenge update: ..."The
  supplement includes the Congressional Justifications for our
  programs and mission areas, as well as my letter to Congress
  highlighting key points of the budget request. We are currently
  assessing the priorities and impacts to our teams and programs, and
  I have asked our leadership team to move forward with discussing
  their specific areas with you soon. Please take time to review the
  additional information on the budget documents online..."

  Comments...

  Not much different than what leaked out earlier. And is really just
  a wishlist from the Administration.  As before in the first
  Administration, hopefully Congress (and Issacman) will restore some
  some funding and projects.

  Jared has publicly supported MSR, hopefully heùll have some sway
  with the WH and Congress.

  MSR is 11 billion. A Ford class aircraft carrier is 10 billion. MSR
  is toast. JPL costed the mission out of existence.

  I work on MSR so it saddens me to say this, but it was seriously
  mis-managed. NASA blew it on this one. Would have been such a cool
  and important mission for Mars science. I hate to see any cuts but I
  am not surprised about this one.

  They go in-depth with the CS FTE and how many folks are going to get
  laid off. Some centers get a slight decrease while others get cut
  nearly half.

  This budget calls for eliminating 5,000 civil servant positions from
  the agency relative to FY25. What an absolute nightmare for NASA.

     1/3 of the agency -- and then there's the contractor work
     force on top of that...

  Between now and when congress passes the appropriation (which is
  quite possibly never, like FY25), NASA is required to use the
  presidentùs budget as actual planning numbers, and operate
  accordingly. If and when congress passes something it could be too
  late to reverse.

  The FY26 budget doesn't retroactively cut the FY25 budget, and
  NASA is staffed to accommodate the FY25 budget, and the FY25 budget
  is law. That money has to be spent to do what it was appropriated
  for. For example RST was on the chopping block in the president's
  budget every year in his last term. Obviously NASA didn't lay off
  the RST staff and cancel the contracts then rehire and redo them a
  few months later four times.  That's not to say the
  administration won't try to do something unlawful, they already
  have. But HHS and NIH were specific ideological targets of the
  administration, and even then their efforts haven't been as clean
  and straightforward as they'd hope so NASA may not seem worth the
  same trouble.

  OK so WTF? What's the news? What level of funding are they
  eyeballing at the moment? I know Prez at 18B and House and Senate
  $24B, what's the final deal? Or do we wait? Probies need to thank
  the can kickers.

  From the Senate "NASA Transition Authorization Act" a few months
  back, it shows there is major support for NASA at $25,507,540,000
  (MCC25339 Y9G) And the House similar support late last year with
  $25,224,640,000 (H. R. 8958) Reading through them ó Iùm not
  all that worried now

  I think this request is definitely the low-ball, and Congress will
  push back some. This request cuts 700 NASA jobs from Texas, 526 from
  Alabama, 510 from Florida, 554 from Ohio, 100 from
  Mississipi. That's 10 Republican senators.  What concerns me is
  if they haggle over the top-line budget numbers and the
  administration still just RIFs a third of the workforce because they
  want to.

  48% of Civil Servants at GSFC are gone. A once thriving center with
  3k+ CS folks now down to 1.5k¦ Itùs not looking like a good
  summer for these folks. Depressing actually.

  A proposed cut of 48% to GSFC FTEs, and even JSC/MSFC/KSC, which
  fared the best, are looking at cutting 20-25%.

  39-40% FTE cuts at Langley, Ames, and Glenn Research centers. That
  is going to be a massive long term hit to NASA's research, which
  unfortunately is where most of NASA's long term economic impact
  is generated. Talk about shooting ourselves in the foot. It's a
  great way to initiate a death spiral for NASA R&D, and 40% cuts make
  it a pretty steep descent.  For those talking about congress coming
  in and rescuing us, be aware that NASA has to plan to the proposed
  budget and that includes staffing and procurement. Even if congress
  comes through with some gravy later on, it could be too late.

  STEM outreach is cut to zero. That's a very long term negative
  impact to the US aerospace industry. We will pay for that in ways we
  cannot even imagine.



5/30/25: Science.  Dozens of active and planned NASA spacecraft killed
  in Trump budget request / Proposal would end nearly all new major
  science missions

President Donald Trump’s administration is seeking to throttle the
scientific ambitions of NASA, prematurely ending a host of active
missions in orbit studying Earth and other planets, while also ending
the agency’s work to develop their successors. The plans, released
today, call for a “leaner” agency that will land “the first human ever,
an American, on Mars.” But they would effectively end NASA’s
long-standing role as the world leader in space science, researchers
say—if the U.S. Congress follows through on them.

Earlier this month, with its “skinny” budget request, the Trump
administration made clear its desire to drastically slash NASA’s
science spending, with a proposal to cut it in half, down to $3.9
billion. But beyond the possible cancellation of several major
in-development missions—including the troubled $7 billion Mars Sample
Return (MSR), which will collect rock samples from Mars and return
them to Earth—the proposal had few details. That changed today, with
the late Friday afternoon release of the president’s full 2026 budget
request. It would end some 40 “lower priority” missions, the budget
said, “for a leaner, more focused Science program.”

The long list of cuts, which would still need to be approved by
Congress, “will really damage our ability to monitor critical processes
from space,” says Anne Nolin, a remote-sensing scientist at the
University of Nevada, Reno. The losses aren’t limited to climate change,
she adds—they would also undermine U.S. capacity to scout for critical
minerals and forecast the weather.

“This is a tragic mistake for the new administration,” says Alan Stern,
a planetary scientist at the Southwest Research Institute and former
NASA science chief. The proposal undercuts the country’s science
pipeline and wastes billions of dollars, he adds.

The request would kill off missions that are active in space right
now, including two Orbiting Carbon Observatories (OCOs): OCO-2, a
standalone spacecraft launched in 2014, and OCO-3, which is mounted on
the International Space Station. Both missions carry a spectrometer
that spies on wavelengths of light absorbed by carbon dioxide
molecules, providing an ability to map atmospheric carbon abundance
around the planet. The missions enabled investigations into the
variations of the natural carbon cycle and also proved capable of
detecting human carbon emissions.

The budget proposal would also end the Earth-facing instruments on the
Deep Space Climate Observatory, which monitors space weather and
records snapshots of the planet’s surface. It would kill the space
station’s Sage III instrument, which makes long-term measurements of
ozone, water vapor, and other gases in the atmosphere. And it would
terminate the Terra, Aqua, and Aura satellites, each of which has
operated for more than 2 decades, providing unprecedented insight
into climate change with steady, well-calibrated instruments. And
although Terra and Aqua are both near the end of their lives, Aura,
which measures the stratosphere in a way no other satellite can
imitate, could operate until late this decade.

The losses would not stop at Earth. The proposal would end the Juno
mission orbiting Jupiter, which has revealed the gas giant’s interior
structure and provided close-up views of its large moons. It would end
New Horizons, which famously imaged Pluto and is now pushing into a
Kuiper belt of cold, icy objects that is deeper than scientists once
thought . It would terminate the OSIRIS-APEX mission, which is reusing
the healthy spacecraft that returned asteroid samples to Earth to
visit the asteroid Apophis right after it makes a close pass of Earth
in 2029. And it would kill off several spacecraft orbiting Mars,
including Mars Odyssey and Maven, while pulling the agency’s funds
supporting Mars Express, another orbiter operated by the European
Space Agency.

The plans would also kill off nearly every major science mission the
agency has not yet begun to build. It would end development of the
Atmosphere Observing System (AOS), a multibillion-dollar series of
satellites meant to study the complex formation of clouds and storms
and their alteration by pollution—one of the main sources of
uncertainty for future climate change, seen most recently in the
debate on how much ship pollution reductions influence recent record
high temperatures.

It would also terminate the Surface Biology and Geology (SBG) mission,
which would loft an instrument into space capable of dividing
reflected light into more than 400 wavelength channels across the
visible and into the infrared. While these measurements can be used to
study methane and carbon dioxide emissions, such imaging spectrometers
—which serve, in effect, as molecular mapping tools—can also be used
to prospect for critical minerals and track forest and farm
health. The proposal to end SBG is particularly disappointing, Nolin
says. “It’s deeply unfortunate they don’t understand the greater value
of an instrument like that,” she says.

In the planetary science division, the administration would cancel two
much-delayed missions NASA has planned for Venus. One, called DAVINCI,
would send an armored sphere plunging through the venusian atmosphere,
measuring noble gases to sort out the planet's origins and sniffing
for sulfur and carbon near the surface for more evidence of recent
volcanic activity. The other, Veritas, would use a radar to peer
through the planet's thick clouds and re-create its topography,
revealing whether volcanoes or variants of tectonic plates are active
on its surface. The MSR mission is still canceled, the budget said, as
it is “anticipated that future missions to Mars will return samples
for study on Earth.”

The budget would not seek to end the Roman Space Telescope, a survey
telescope as big as Hubble, as some had suspected—but it would strip its
development funding down from $400 million to $156 million, potentially
undermining its finishing steps. For heliophysics, it would also end the
agency’s attempts to revive the Geospace Dynamics Constellation, a swarm
of six satellites that would measure interactions between the Sun and
Earth’s magnetosphere. Also surviving in the request are Dragonfly, an
ambitious rotorcraft that will explore Saturn’s large moon, Titan; and
NISAR, a joint radar mission with India, launching next month, that will
measure minute changes on Earth’s surface.

By killing off so many projects, the proposal would devastate the budget
of the agency’s two lead science centers, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
and Goddard Space Flight Center. Further pain would come as the budget
seeks to rework space missions NASA is developing for other agencies,
including the next generation of Landsat for the U.S. Geological Survey
and new geostationary satellites for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration.

The proposed cuts would provide an immediate challenge for Trump’s
nominee for NASA administrator, Jared Isaacman, who could be up for a
confirmation vote next week in the Senate. Isaacman has told lawmakers
a 50% cut in NASA’s science budget is not “an optimal outcome,”
promising that he would “advocate for strong investment in space
science —- across astrophysics, planetary science, Earth science,
lunar science, and heliophysics.” That would include continuing with
the Roman Space Telescope, he said, though he was also open to the
idea of fully outsourcing MSR to private industry.

Although the agency would continue to operate missions it has just
launched, if it continues down the track laid out by the budget, its
capacity would be much diminished. If the agency also ends its Artemis
Moon program after landing astronauts back on the lunar surface, there’s
a real risk that the agency devolves into nothing more than a glorified
launch services provider.

But Stern, for one, is ready to take the fight for NASA’s future to
Congress. “I believe these cuts will not stand,” he says. “I’m ready to
take up that battle. And I know I’m in good company.”



5/31/25: ArsTechnica.  Trump pulls Isaacman nomination for space. /
 Source: "NASA is f***ed."  "NASA's budget request is just a
 going-out-of-business mode" without Isaacman.

 The Trump administration has confirmed that it is pulling the
 nomination of private astronaut Jared Isaacman to lead NASA.  First
 reported by Semafor, the decision appears to have been made because
 Isaacman was not politically loyal enough to the Trump
 administration.

 "The Administrator of NASA will help lead humanity into space and
 execute President Trump's bold mission of planting the American
 flag on the planet Mars," Liz Huston, a White House Spokesperson,
 said in a statement released Saturday. "It's essential that the next
 leader of NASA is in complete alignment with President Trump's
 America First agenda and a replacement will be announced directly by
 President Trump soon."

 The US Senate Commerce Committee approved Issacman's nomination by a
 vote of 19 to 9 one month ago, advancing his candidacy to the floor
 of the US Senate, with unanimous support from Republicans in that
 April vote. Approval was anticipated after the Memorial Day
 holiday. But the tide started to turn against Isaacman late this past
 week, with the first rumblings of problems coming on Friday, May 30.

 On Saturday, far-right political activist Laura Loomer said on X,
 "Deep State operatives are trying to derail President Trump's NASA
 Administrator pick Jared Isaacman before his Senate confirmation vote
 this week."  This was the first public sign that Isaacman's candidacy
 was imperiled.

 So what happened? The waters of MAGA run murky, and the political
 machinations of the Trump administration are abstruse. However, the
 timing of Isaacman's derailment coincides with the recent departure
 of SpaceX founder Elon Musk from Washington. Musk had a central role
 in the Trump administration during its first four months. In an
 interview on Tuesday, Musk told Ars that he has now "significantly"
 reduced his involvement in politics.

 Musk was a key factor behind Isaacman's nomination as NASA
 administrator, and with his backing, Isaacman was able to skip some
 of the party purity tests that have been applied to other Trump
 administration nominees. One mark against Isaacman is that he had
 recently donated money to Democrats. He also indicated opposition to
 some of the White House's proposed cuts to NASA's science budget.
 Musk's role in the government was highly controversial, winning him
 enemies both among opponents of Trump's "Make America Great Again"
 agenda as well as inside the administration. One source told Ars
 that, with Musk's exit, his opponents within the administration
 sought to punish him by killing Isaacman's nomination.

 The loss of Isaacman is almost certainly a blow to NASA, which faces
 substantial budget cuts. The Trump administration's budget request
 for fiscal year 2026, released Friday, seeks $18.8 billion for the
 agency next year -- a 24 percent cut from the agency's budget of
 $24.8 billion for FY 2025.

 Now? "NASA is f---ed," one current leader in the agency told Ars on
 Saturday.  "NASA's budget request is just a going-out-of-business
 mode without Jared there to innovate," a former senior NASA leader
 said.

 The Trump administration did not immediately name a new nominee, but
 two people told Ars that former US Air Force Lieutenant General
 Steven L. Kwast may be near the top of the list. Now retired, Kwast
 has a distinguished record in the Air Force and is politically loyal
 to Trump and MAGA.

 However, his background seems to be far less oriented toward NASA's
 civil space mission and far more focused on seeing space as a
 battlefieldôdecidedly not an arena for cooperation and peaceful
 exploration.

 Comments...

    We are witnessing the dismantling of the American state. These
    losses will be generational in their impact and frankly we may
    never get them back. Utterly devastating and incredibly sad.

    trump discovers he almost had someone who was qualified in the job

    I wonder how much longer they'll continue to blame the supposed
    Deep State for everything?

       Texas has been a Republican uniparty state for ~30 years. They
       still blame Democrats for literally everything.

    He'll probably be replaced by someone who thinks the moon landing
    was a hoax.
 
    I'm glad Isaacman has helped prove that good people are not part
    of the Trump regime in any capacity.

    Bye bye US preeminence in space.
 
    "...but hey, at least Starship isn't being held back by the FAA
    anymore." -- To be seen. Trump is massively vindictive, so if he
    becomes sufficiently pissed at Musk, all bets are off, especially
    if he's told that there's no way for a lunar landing, let
    alone a Mars landing, before his term ends. (Assuming his term
    ever ends.)

    It's gonna be way, way worse than [3 years and 7 months].  For
    example, just in research, NSF grants are down over 51% this year
    and that is across the board. In my field it's 67%. This means
    that positions, both faculty and graduate, and undergrad student
    slots are going to have to be reduced. And there is no reason to
    think that this isn't going to be ongoing throughout the next 4
    years. This means that when it's hopefully over it could take a
    very, very long time to recover just to get back to where we were
    6 months ago.  US Government funding of science is now below where
    it was 35 years ago.  This is happening across the entire
    government in pretty much every area not benefiting a very small
    group of very wealthy people. The rest of us are well and truly
    fucked.
 
    When he was put forward, I was not a fan of his ties to Musk, but
    at least his interest in space was genuine. Maybe he would work
    out despite that.  It was like üphewý we could have done a
    lot worse. I guess we are about to find out just how much worse.
    Fucking sigh¦¦

    Trump is gutting this country from the inside, and I just don't
    understand how 40% of this country doesn't see that.

    'Poor Elon Musk', really? Are readers expected to forget
    that he spent $275m to buy the US presidential election for Trump,
    and was wearing a stupid MAGA hat for months? And that the
    DOGEboys are his?

    The fact that Isaacman's nomination has been withdrawn seems
    indicative to me that maybe his agenda would not have been utterly
    corrupt and awful.  I do agree 100% with that last sentence,
    though: "NASA being f*cked is a function of the elected
    leadership, not its appointees."

    Yeah we can thank all those people who thought it was a good idea
    to have a reality TV host and rapist as president, and the rest of
    the fuckers in this country who wasted votes on no-chance third
    party candidates or simply sat on their hands.

    I was a bit leery of Isaacman to lead NASA, because of his
    proximity to Musk, but he was obviously passionate about space,
    and human spaceflight, so I thought, "well, he's probably the best
    nominee I can in a Trump regime". Seems like even he was too good
    to be true. It's deeply sad to see America being so gleefully
    corrupted and destroyed from within, with the gloating support of
    nearly half the population. A country where fealty to a cult
    leader is the only qualification to lead entire agencies is not to
    going to thrive for long. Not that it's really thriving for most
    people now.

    5 years ago Elon Musk was a pro-Obama eco-friendly Democrat. 20
    years ago Donald Trump was a pro-abortion Democratic donor. Their
    current political incarnation is no more real than those
    were. It's all grifting, all the way down.

    Guess exploring the final frontier is easy compared to navigating
    the MAGA minefield - boldly going nowhere, fast!

    Musk invested $250m (+44b for Twitter, people forget that for some
    reason) to install a fascist government to run American. He got
    it. Everything else is crocodile tears.  


JUNE

6/2/25: 

From: "Zhou, Yifan (uyr2ce)" <uyr2ce@virginia.edu>
To: "astro-alldept@virginia.edu" <astro-alldept@virginia.edu>
Subject: [astro-faculty] Fwd: AURA Member Rep Telecon - Fri 6/6

Hi Everyone,

AURA is holding a teleconference to provide an update on FY26 budget situation.
I plan to attend as our department AURA representative. If you have questions,
please send them to me and I will submit them to the organizer. 

Meanwhile, white house’s FY26 budget requests can be viewed below:

NASA: https://www.nasa.gov/fy-2026-budget-request/
NSF: https://nsf-gov-resources.nsf.gov/files/00-NSF-FY26-CJ-Entire-Rollup.pdf

Thanks,
Yifan

      Begin forwarded message:

From: Samantha Asbury <sasbury@aura-astronomy.org>
Subject: AURA Member Rep Telecon - Fri 6/6
Date: June 2, 2025 at 4:34:15 PM EDT
To: Member Representatives <MR@aura-astronomy.org>, "Member
Representatives - Alternates" <AlternateMR@aura-astronomy.org>, "ALT (AURA
Leadership Team)" <alt@aura-astronomy.org>
Cc: Daria Bollinger <dbollinger@stsci.edu>, Tracy Lamb <lamb@stsci.edu>,
"Lori Stuckey" <lori.stuckey@noirlab.edu>, Jen Ditsler <jditsler@nso.edu>

Hello Member Reps and Staff,

I trust you all have been well. Please join AURA for a telecon to provide
an update on the current FY26 budget situation, thisFriday 6/6 1-2pm ET. A
calendar invite with Zoom information will be sent shortly.

If you'd like to submit a question ahead of time, please use the link
below.
https://tinyurl.com/MbrRepTelecon

Thank you,
Samantha Asbury
Senior Projects and Events/Meeting Coordinator
sasbury@aura-astronomy.org

image001.jpg
Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.

____________________
Dr. Yifan Zhou Assistant Professor
University of Virginia 
Email: yzhou@virginia.edu
Personal Website: https://yifanzhou.space
Phone: 520-447-0938
Pronouns: he/him/his



6/2/25:  FYI

Date: Mon, 2 Jun 2025 16:50:26
From: FYI <fyi@aipcomm.org>
To: rwo@virginia.edu

Subject: This Week: NSF and NASA detail proposed budget cuts / DOE
    begins axing major projects / State Department dissolving multiple S&T
    offices

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP

THE WEEK OF JUNE 2, 2025

A rendering of the proposed Thirty Meter Telescope, which NSF has declined to
advance to the agency’s final design phase. Courtesy of the TMT International
Observatory

PROPOSED SCIENCE CUTS COMING INTO FOCUS

The Trump administration has begun elaborating on its proposed budget
for fiscal year 2026, publishing some agency-specific documents and a
government-wide summary last Friday that expand on the “skinny budget”
released in early May.  The National Science Foundation’s full budget
request to Congress details how the proposed 57% topline cut would be
distributed across the agency’s research programs and facilities. For
instance, NSF proposes to operate only one of the two existing Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) sites and to cut
support for the Large Hadron Collider to about 60% of the current
level, reducing U.S. researchers’ participation in LHC research
accordingly. NSF also indicates it will not advance the Thirty Meter
Telescope project to the final design phase or supply any further
funding. The agency does pledge to advance the Giant Magellan
Telescope to the final design phase but does not commit to seek
construction funding for the project. (The agency has been debating
whether to support either project to completion.)

Despite suggested cuts to high-profile science facilities, the
administration does propose to increase NSF’s major facility
construction budget to $251 million, up from $234 million in fiscal
year 2024. The lion’s share of this budget ($201 million) would go to
the planned Leadership-Class Computing Facility led by the University
of Texas at Austin.

AI and quantum information science are the only crosscutting research
areas that are protected from major cuts in the budget proposal. NSF
estimates the total number of competitive grant awards would plummet
from around 9,600 to 2,300, and the proposal acceptance rate would
drop from 26% to 7%.

NASA’s request proposes a 47% cut to science programs compared to
fiscal year 2024 operating plan levels, including a 71% cut to
biological and physical sciences and a 66% cut to astrophysics. The
budget provides for a “leaner, more focused science program,
eliminating over 40 lower-priority missions,” the document
states. Among the proposed cancellations are the Mars Sample Return
mission, Chandra X-ray telescope, various Earth observation
satellites, and the HelioSwarm solar observation satellites. The
administration also proposes to eliminate the STEM Engagement
directorate.

Presidential budgets have historically served more as an indication of
policy priorities than an exact blueprint for spending decisions, and
Congress will advance its own spending proposals this summer. Any
final discretionary spending legislation will need bipartisan support
in the Senate to overcome the 60-vote threshold needed to advance
bills in that chamber.

DOE BEGINS TERMINATING MAJOR CLEAN ENERGY PROJECTS

The Department of Energy terminated over $3.7 billion in clean energy
grants last week that were awarded during the Biden
administration. DOE did not release a list of the affected projects
but said they primarily work on decarbonization or carbon capture and
sequestration. The agency’s press release emphasized that 16 of the 24
awards were approved between Donald Trump’s election and his
inauguration. DOE said the projects “failed to advance the energy
needs of the American people, were not economically viable, and would
not generate a positive return on investment of taxpayer dollars.” The
terminations resulted from a DOE review of 179 awards that were
“rushed out the door, particularly in the final days of the Biden
administration,” Energy Secretary Chris Wright said earlier in May. At
an appropriations hearing for DOE, Wright said the Biden
administration awarded $93 billion in the period after Trump’s
election. Democratic appropriators have sharply criticized the
decision to terminate projects already selected for funding.

STATE DEPARTMENT FORGES AHEAD WITH PLANS TO DISSOLVE SCIENCE OFFICES

A major reorganization of the State Department that would eliminate
multiple science offices is moving forward, with Secretary of State
Marco Rubio submitting a plan to Congress last week. Internal
documents reviewed by FYI suggest affected units include the Office of
Science and Technology Cooperation, the Office of Global Change, the
Office of the Science and Technology Advisor to the Secretary, and the
Office of the Special Envoy for Critical and Emerging
Technology. Statutory functions of these units will be reassigned to
other offices. Current and former State Department staff warned FYI
last month that disruption to the work of the Office of Science and
Technology Cooperation could have a significant negative impact on
scientists, as the office oversees major scientific international
collaboration agreements for research facilities such as CERN and
ITER, among other functions.

The organizational chart proposed by Rubio retains the position of
assistant secretary of oceans, environmental, and international
scientific affairs. The chart also includes a new assistant secretary
for “emerging threats.”


ALSO ON OUR RADAR

 * President Donald Trump has withdrawn his nomination of Jared
    Isaacman to lead NASA, reportedly because of donations he made to
    Democrats. The Senate planned to take a final vote on Isaacman’s
    nomination this month.

 * A group of 16 states sued the National Science Foundation last week
    over its indirect costs cap and the termination of DEI-related
    grants.

 * Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick will testify before Senate and
    House appropriators on Wednesday and Thursday, respectively. His
    department’s budget request includes steep cuts to NIST and NOAA.

 * The Senate Foreign Relations Committee will meet Thursday to
    consider advancing the International Quantum Research Exchange Act
    and a bill that would extend the International Organizations
    Immunities Act to CERN.



In Case You Missed It
Rubio May 2025 Senate Foreign Relations Committee.png

US to ‘Aggressively Revoke’ Visas Held by Chinese Students

MAY 30, 2025

The action is among a series of recent and anticipated clampdowns on academic
exchanges with China.
A conference session with attendees sitting at tables, facing towards two
speakers and two projector screens displaying presentation slides.

Researchers Scramble Following NSF Grant Cuts

MAY 28, 2025

Former grantees are navigating how to close out or continue their work without
funding from the agency.




6/4/25:  

Date: Wed, 4 Jun 2025 12:00:29
From: President Thomas F. Rosenbaum <president@caltech.edu>
To: rwo@virginia.edu
Subject: 2024-25 Academic Year-End Letter

To: The Caltech Community
From:  Thomas F. Rosenbaum
      Sonja and William Davidow Presidential Chair 
      and Professor of Physics

Re: 2024-25 Academic Year-End Letter

When I last wrote you in December 2024, wishing you constancy and
courage in the new year, I don’t believe that any of us could have
anticipated the tempest that ensued with the turn of the calendar. The
Eaton fire swept through Altadena and surrounding neighborhoods in
January 2025, uprooting Caltech staff, faculty, and students. Between
campus and JPL, more than 300 lost their homes and thousands were
displaced. The harsh reality is that it will take years to recover. At
the same time, the support of a tightly knit, caring community became
evident immediately. We found temporary housing for scores of victims
and raised an astonishing $5 million plus for an emergency relief fund
that was dispersed in short order and with little bureaucracy. Classes
resumed within days and the research enterprise has continued to
hum. Our shared mission of forefront research and education in service
of society inspires all of us and makes manifest the need to buoy
those in need.

The Santa Anas were followed in quick order by ill winds blowing from
Washington, DC. A spate of executive orders and Congressional actions
have assaulted higher education from every direction: attachment of
funds, unilateral lowering of overhead reimbursements well below
negotiated rates for actual costs, proposed slashing of the science
budget by 50%, decimation of science agencies, many fold increases in
the endowment tax, restrictions on international scholars. As we
attempt to navigate this treacherous landscape, it is helpful to step
back and ask, what is our role and what are our responsibilities as a
research university in a democratic society?

For generations, the relationship between universities and the federal
government has been governed by a mutually beneficial social
compact. In return for tax exempt status, universities support our
democracy by educating informed and involved citizens, and by
translating fundamental discoveries into technologies that drive our
economy, strengthen our national defense, and improve people’s lives
and health. Since World War ll, the research mission of the university
has been amplified by substantial government investment, leading to a
rise in standards of living, longer and more productive life spans for
our citizens, and protection from external threats.

The American higher education system is arguably the most successful
industry in the country in terms of demand, output, and
longevity. With only 4.5% of the world’s population, the United States
has competed successfully against all comers by becoming the
destination of choice for many of the world’s most talented, creative,
and ambitious individuals, many of whom are drawn to our shores by our
preeminent college and university system. Historically, a high
proportion of these immigrants (fully 75% according to government
data) have stayed and applied their skills for the betterment of
society as American citizens. Caltech is no exception. Roughly half of
our graduate students are international; approximately 45% of our
faculty were born abroad; and close to 40% of American Nobel Prizes in
the sciences were awarded to researchers who emigrated to the United
States.

At a time when the social compact between universities and the
government is fraying, what can we do? I believe that it is incumbent
upon us to distill the essential components that permit universities
to fulfill their missions as creators of knowledge and bulwarks of
democracy. We can only meet the challenges of the day by sharply
articulating our principles and staying true to them.  Prominent among
these principles are:

 1. Intellectual freedom. Knowledge emerges from the clash of ideas,
    honed by testing arguments with those who disagree in an
    environment where an insight does not have to be popular to be
    correct. It requires an environment where the members of the
    community feel free to express their thoughts without fear of
    censorship (external or internal), to engage with contrary views,
    and to be willing to change their minds. This includes the ability
    of faculty to teach what they wish and universities to hire whom
    they wish, always consistent with an academically rigorous vetting
    process.

 2. Institutional neutrality. Freedom of individual expression bears
    as well on the issue of formal institutional
    pronouncements. Universities should aim to create an environment
    where all members of the community are empowered to speak out
    about issues that matter to them and support that freedom and
    ability. All members of the community should feel free to take
    stances that may be unpopular, but reflect who they are and what
    they believe, without an official university position quenching
    that ability. Hence, it is prudent to confine official university
    statements to issues that bear directly on the core missions of
    research and education. This does not preclude an institutional
    response to worldly challenges through tangible intercessions that
    directly support at-risk members of the community, consonant with
    the university’s mission.

 3. Inclusive excellence. Knowledge is most effectively created by
    bringing together exceptional people of diverse perspectives, of
    different backgrounds, of distinct sensibilities, and letting them
    hone their conceptions of the world by expressing their views
    freely and, in colloquy, shaping each other's ideas. It requires
    fashioning a robust, civic space, welcoming to individuals from
    all backgrounds, prizing excellence, committed to rigorous
    inquiry, devoted to understanding the natural world and improving
    the human world. The most talented individuals have the most
    choices, and both the local environment (university ethos and
    policies) and the global environment (e.g., funding, immigration
    policy, freedom of expression) must be attractive for them to
    pursue their futures in the United States.

 4. Free movement of people and ideas. Resources are an essential
    component of discovery and innovation, but the structure in which
    those resources are applied determines the level of success. The
    United States traditionally has valued and encouraged
    collaborations across disciplines, across university communities,
    and across national boundaries, all of which have been key to
    accelerating progress and vaulting American universities (and
    industries) into world-leading status.

What we do every day and what we do together matters. We believe in
facts, we believe in truth, and we believe in science. We believe in
challenging the accepted wisdom if the evidence drives us to that
conclusion. We believe in learning from those who are different from
us and those with whom we disagree, seeking to sharpen our own
understanding. We believe in the transformative capacity of discovery,
as a way to realize our human potential and as a means to improve the
human condition. There is great power in this clarity and there is no
more important time than now to demonstrate the constancy of our
aspirations through our courage to defend our communal mission.




6/4/25:  ArsTechnica.  

Missing the big picture

  US science is being wrecked, and its leadership is fighting the last war

     Facing an extreme budget, the National Academies hosted an event
     that ignored it.

John Timmer 
Jun 4, 2025
6:00 PM | 136


WASHINGTON, DC — The general outline of the Trump administration's
proposed 2026 budget was released a few weeks back, and it included
massive cuts for most agencies, including every one that funds
scientific research.  Late last week, those agencies began releasing
details of what the cuts would mean for the actual projects and people
they support. And the results are as bad as the initial budget had
suggested: one-of-a-kind scientific experiment facilities and hardware
retired, massive cuts in supported scientists, and entire areas of
research halted.

And this comes in an environment where previously funded grants are
being terminated, funding is being held up for ideological screening,
and universities have been subjected to arbitrary funding freezes.
Collectively, things are heading for damage to US science that will take
decades to recover from. It's a radical break from the trajectory
science had been on.

That's the environment that the US's National Academies of Science
found itself in yesterday while hosting the State of the Science event
in Washington, DC. It was an obvious opportunity for the nation's
leading scientific organization to warn the nation of the consequences
of the path that the current administration has been
traveling. Instead, the event largely ignored the present to worry
about a future that may never exist.


    The proposed cuts

The top-line budget numbers proposed earlier indicated things would be
bad: nearly 40 percent taken off the National Institutes of Health's
budget, the National Science Foundation down by over half. But now,
many of the details of what those cuts mean are becoming apparent.


NASA's budget includes sharp cuts for planetary science, which would
be cut in half and then stay flat for the rest of the decade, with the
Mars Sample Return mission canceled. All other science budgets,
including Earth Science and Astrophysics, take similar hits; one
astronomer posted a graphic showing how many present and future
missions that would mean. Active missions that have returned
unprecedented data, like Juno and New Horizons, would go, as would two
Mars orbiters. As described by Science magazine's news team "The plans
would also kill off nearly every major science mission the agency has
not yet begun to build."

A NASA graphic showing different missions focused on astrophysics. Red
Xs have been superimposed on most of them.
A chart prepared by astronomer Laura Lopez showing just how many
astrophysics missions will be cancelled. Credit: Laura Lopez
<https://bsky.app/profile/ohdearz.bsky.social/post/3lqi5ueblrs2t>

The National Science Foundation, which funds much of the US's
fundamental research, is also set for brutal cuts. Biology,
engineering, and education will all be slashed by over 70 percent;
computer science, math and physical science, and social and behavioral
science will all see cuts of over 60 percent. International programs
will take an 80 percent cut. The funding rate of grant proposals is
expected to drop from 26 percent to just 7 percent, meaning the vast
majority of grants submitted to the NSF will be a waste of time. The
number of people involved in NSF-funded activities will drop from over
300,000 to just 90,000. Almost every program to broaden participation
in science will be eliminated.

As for specifics, they're equally grim. The fleet of research ships will
essentially become someone else's problem: "The FY 2026 Budget Request
will enable partial support of some ships." We've been able to better
pin down the nature and location of gravitational wave events as
detectors in Japan and Italy joined the original two LIGO detectors; the
NSF will reverse that progress by shutting one of the LIGOs. The NSF's
contributions to detectors at the Large Hadron Collider will be cut by
over half, and one of the two very large telescopes it was helping fund
will be cancelled (say goodbye to the Thirty Meter Telescope). "Access
to the telescopes at Kitt Peak and Cerro Tololo will be phased out," and
the NSF will transfer the facilities to other organizations.

The Department of Health and Human Services has been less detailed
about the specific cuts its divisions will see, largely focusing on
the overall numbers, which are down considerably. The NIH, which is
facing a cut of over 40 percent, will be reorganized, with its 19
institutes pared down to just eight. This will result in some odd
pairings, such as the dental and eye institutes ending up in the same
place; genomics and biomedical imaging will likewise end up under the
same roof. Other groups like the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration will also face major
cuts.

Issues go well beyond the core science agencies, as well. In the
Department of Energy, funding for wind, solar, and renewable grid
integration has been zeroed out, essentially ending all programs in
this area. Hydrogen and fuel cells face a similar fate. Collectively,
these had gotten over $600 billion dollars in 2024's budget. Other
areas of science at the DOE, such as high-energy physics, fusion, and
biology, receive relatively minor cuts that are largely in line with
the ones faced by administration priorities like fossil and nuclear
energy.


    Will this happen?

It goes without saying that this would amount to an abandonment of US
scientific leadership at a time when most estimates of China's research
spending show it approaching US-like levels of support. Not only would
it eliminate many key facilities, instruments, and institutions that
have helped make the US a scientific powerhouse, but it would also block
the development of newer and additional ones. The harms are so
widespread that even topics that the administration claims are
priorities would see severe cuts.

And the damage is likely to last for generations, as support is cut at
every stage of the educational pipeline that prepares people for STEM
careers. This includes careers in high-tech industries, which may
require relocation overseas due to a combination of staffing concerns
and heightened immigration controls.

That said, we've been here before in the first Trump administration,
when budgets were proposed with potentially catastrophic implications
for US science. But Congress limited the damage and maintained
reasonably consistent budgets for most agencies.

Can we expect that to happen again? So far, the signs are not especially
promising. The House has largely adopted the Trump administration's
budget priorities, despite the fact that the budget they pass turns its
back on decades of supposed concerns about deficit spending. While the
Senate has yet to take up the budget, it has also been very pliant
during the second Trump administration, approving grossly unqualified
cabinet picks such as Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

All of which would seem to call for the leadership of US science
organizations to press the case for the importance of science funding to
the US and highlight the damage that these cuts would cause. But, if
yesterday's National Academies event is anything to judge by, the
leadership is not especially interested.


    Altered states

As the nation's premier science organization, and one that performs lots
of analyses for the government, the National Academies would seem to be
in a position to have its concerns taken seriously by members of
Congress. And, given that the present and future of science in the US is
being set by policy choices, a meeting entitled the State of the Science
would seem like the obvious place to address those concerns.

If so, it was not obvious to Marcia McNutt, the president of the NAS,
who gave the presentation. She made some oblique references to current
problems, saying, “We are embarking on a radical new experiment in what
conditions promote science leadership, with the US being the treatment
group, and China as the control," and acknowledged that "uncertainties
over the science budgets for next year, coupled with cancellations of
billions of dollars of already hard-won research grants, is causing an
exodus of researchers."

But her primary focus was on the trends that have been operative in
science funding and policy leading up to /but excluding/ the second
Trump administration. McNutt suggested this was needed to look beyond
the next four years. However, that ignores the obvious fact that US
science will be fundamentally different if the Trump administration can
follow through on its plans and policies; the trends that have been
present for the last two decades will be irrelevant.

She was also remarkably selective about her avoidance of discussing
Trump administration priorities. After noting that faculty surveys have
suggested they spend roughly 40 percent of their time handling
regulatory requirements, she twice mentioned that the administration's
anti-regulatory stance could be a net positive here (once calling it "an
opportunity to help"). Yet she neglected to note that many of the
abandoned regulations represent a retreat from science-driven policy.

McNutt also acknowledged the problem of science losing the bipartisan
support it has enjoyed, as trust in scientists among US conservatives
has been on a downward trend. But she suggested it was scientists'
responsibility to fix the problem, even though it's largely the product
of one party deciding it can gain partisan advantage by raising doubts
about scientific findings in fields like climate change and vaccine safety.

The panel discussion that came after largely followed McNutt's lead in
avoiding any mention of the current threats to science. The lone
exception was Heather Wilson, president of the University of Texas at El
Paso and a former Republican member of the House of Representatives and
secretary of the Air Force during the first Trump administration. Wilson
took direct aim at Trump's cuts to funding for underrepresented groups,
arguing, "Talent is evenly distributed, but opportunity is not." After
arguing that "the moral authority of science depends on the pursuit of
truth," she highlighted the cancellation of grants that had been used to
study diseases that are more prevalent in some ethnic groups, saying
"that's not woke science—that's genetics."

Wilson was clearly the exception, however, as the rest of the panel
largely avoided direct mention of either the damage already done to US
science funding or the impending catastrophe on the horizon. We've asked
the National Academies' leadership a number of questions about how it
perceives its role at a time when US science is clearly under threat. As
of this article's publication, however, we have not received a response.

At yesterday's event, however, only one person showed a clear sense of
what they thought that role should be—Wilson again, whose strongest
words were directed at the National Academies themselves, which she said
should "do what you've done since Lincoln was president," and stand up
for the truth.


Comments...

It's a classic catch-22. If you resist and speak up you may loose
everything. If you ignore, cower & bow you may loose everything.  The
only certainty is, if do the latter you loose your dignity & soul as
well.  Oh the irony: Every book written in the western world teaches
us to be brave and stand up for what we believe in, yet in reality we
are a bunch of cowards that believe in nothing.
 
It will also kill or gut a lot of suppliers, vendors, and contractors
who provide the tools, supplies, and expertise to keep science
working. Those will likewise be very difficult to replace.
 
There's so much the Trump administration is doing that harms people,
but I feel like what they're doing to science and education will have
the largest detrimental to the US as a country. I don't think we'll
ever recover from this. Even if funding is restored, many of our
professors and researchers will have left the country or moved on to
other jobs, and we'll no longer attract many of the best and the
brightest international students because of the very real threat that
they're just one bad US election away from being locked up and face
deportation for no real reason.

America is the only country strong enough to bring down the United
States.

    True! It's up there with and even beyond Brexit, where the UK
    declared a trade war on itself!
 
I see an image of a drunken country, with nukes in its back pocket,
performing a self-lobotomy.

[This has] been the explicit conservative project for the last
~70 years. They want a clean slate do-over of the New Deal, all at the
behest of our billionaire aristocracy.
 
Say goodbye to radio astronomy.  Our billion-dollar investment in
unprecedented telescope arrays is being rendered useless by SpaceX
Starlink anyway.  And one more thing: In case it isn't obvious,
defunding ground-based astronomy hits particularly hard in remote,
generally economically depressed communities. People work hard at a
fraction of commercial tech sector wages, because it means a salary
and health insurance and lifting families out of poverty. Inspiring
generations of rural kids to pursue careers in STEM fields. Often the
first people in their families to leave home to attend
university. Paving the way for cousins and siblings. Remote astronomy
is a massively fertile investment in our people.  Not only scientists:
those massive sculptures of steel are maintained and operated by
highly-qualified crew.  You could fund a village in West Virginia or
Kentucky or New Mexico for what this administration has spent on
Mar-a-Lago weekends.

The Jurassic Park school of political engagement: its vision is based
on movement! Don’t move a muscle.

McNutt is a 73 year old who is worth millions and has a list of
professional honors and awards a mile long. Unless we’re at the Khmer
Orange point (we are not) she has nothing to lose by speaking up: if
it accomplishes anything, she gets remembered in history as a savior
of American science. If it costs her the job riding the Titanic down,
she can retire to the country of her choice with the respect of her
colleagues around the world.  I appreciate that everyone wants to be
able to avoid attention and just focus on research, but this kind of
thing is part of why professional organizations exist. Someone is
being given an enormous amount of social capital to help look out for
their field, not just to go to expensive dinners several times per
year. The National Academies need to speak up for all of the
researchers, assistants, and students because they’re far better
equipped to do so than a grad student or postdoc being paid peanuts
and dependent on grants for anything other than a complete career
switch.
 
Reagan was already fighting science, on a much smaller scale but with
the same ideology. Most things Trump has been doing have been done and
thought of 40 years ago, if more cautiously. The United States will
not recover until the Republican Party — the party of Reagan — is no
longer a effective political force, even if in the next election we
have a 55% "landslide" Democratic victory.

It's hard to be brave when they are going to take your income, then
your house goes and then you live on the street.

A friend of mine who works for a fluorescence microscope company just
got laid off, along with half the company. It’s very bad.


=======

[The Senate should be working as hard as possible to restore US funding
for basic scientific research that the Trump administration has proposed
to cut.]

The proposed budget cuts threaten the entire scientific ecosystem in
the country.  For a moment, set aside the inevitable long-term
crippling of America's scientific and technological prowess and look
at the short-term economic impact.

Implementing this budget would lead to a financial depression for the
scientific workforce -- not just for the scientists themselves but for
hundreds of thousands of support staff and the tens of thousands of
businesses that supply them.  People can easily visualize the
sophisticated equipment needed by modern science in the case of the
space program...but biology and clinical research laboratories depend
just as much on high-tech infrastructure in the form of advanced
electronics, information technology, precision devices, special
materials, and other indispensable elements.

How many people would lose their jobs?  Since all the money allocated
by the federal government is ultimately spent on people's salaries,
it's easy to make a rough estimate.  The proposed cuts to the major
science agencies amount to about $35 billion.  Since each federal
dollar spent directly on science generates something like an
additional two dollars of related economic activity in the country,
the total loss to the economy would be about $100 billion.  Taking a
round figure for the salary of an average worker in the US scientific
system of $80,000, that implies an equivalent loss of over one million
jobs.  
 
   [Original text was "salary plus benefits...of $100,000" -- but in
   this simple model, the "benefits" are also spent on people's
   salaries.  So, removing the benefits from the per-person
   computation, the model predicts 1,250,000 job losses.]

This will arrive as a sudden calamity, not a gradual transition that
might allow the system to readjust with time.  The US deliberately
adopted a special structure 75 years ago in which basic research is
mainly supported by the government but applied research is mainly
supported by the private sector.  As a result, alternative employment
will not be available for many of the affected people, perhaps for
years.  Many will lose their livelihoods, their financial security,
their homes.  Collateral damage to local housing markets and essential
services like health care will be serious.  The effects will be
centered on communities hosting research universities or other major
research centers all over the country, in red and blue states alike.
Phoenix, Houston, Cleveland, Nashville, Miami, and the "Research
Triangle" in North Carolina are good examples of places often
overlooked by those who imagine research is concentrated in blue
states.

How can anyone think this is good for America? 



-----

Budget cuts: cf. IHE for 6/3/2025; Science for  5/2/25.  

     NASA   6 B  
     NSF    5 B 
     NIH   18 B 
     DOE    1 B (Office of Science) 
     NOAA   1.5 B 
     USGS   0.5 B
     CDC    3 B

TOT:       35 B    

     EDUC  12 B 
     
----

Unilateral (intellectual) disarmament.  


By 7/1/25 I find myself often thinking, "Well, at least astronomy
will continue to thrive in Europe and the rest of the world."
This is incredibly sad...  


=======




6/6/25:  Van Scoyoc newsletter
        
                  Space

Isaacman: people with ‘axes to grind’ about Musk caused withdrawn NASA
nomination Jared Isaacman made clear he believes his nomination to be
administrator of NASA was pulled by the White House because of his
ties to Elon Musk. Appearing on an episode of the All-In Podcast
published June 4, Isaacman said he was informed by the White House May
30 that President Trump was withdrawing his nomination to lead the
space agency, a move that became public the next day. The podcast
appearance provided his first public comments about the withdrawn
nomination other than social media posts. “There were some people that
had some axes to grind, I guess, and I was a good, visible target,”
Isaacman added.

Dozens of NASA space missions could be axed under Trump's budget:
Here's a look at 6 Dozens of NASA's missions to explore the cosmos
could be in jeopardy under a budget proposal from the White
House. President Donald Trump's administration, which released an
initial budget proposal May 2 for the U.S. space agency, dropped more
details Friday, May 30 about just which NASA programs it looks to
cancel. All told, the budget request for the next fiscal year proposes
slashing NASA funding by nearly 25% – from $24.8 billion to $18.8
billion – mostly by eliminating a significant portion of the agency's
science portfolio. Read more: USA Today [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]

Musk-Trump rupture poses a serious threat to NASA and Pentagon
programs Elon Musk’s threat, which he later retracted, to cut off
NASA’s use of SpaceX’s Dragon spacecraft would be a huge blow to NASA,
depriving the space agency of the only American vehicle capable of
transporting astronauts to the International Space Station and
dramatically changing how NASA would access the $100 billion orbiting
laboratory. The threat, posted on X, came during an escalating fight
between President Donald Trump and the wealthiest man in the world,
after Trump had threatened to cancel all of Musk’s company’s federal
contracts. Given SpaceX’s importance to multiple federal programs,
severing those relationships could leave NASA as well as the Pentagon
and intelligence agencies in a lurch. Read more:  Washington Post
[vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]

               Fundamental Science & Engineering

NSF chemistry funding faces 75% cut under Trump budget request The
Trump administration has released more details of its FY2026 budget
request and the picture for research is EVEN WORSE THAN THE ‘SKINNY’
BUDGET released last month [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]. Funding for
chemistry from the National Science Foundation (NSF) in the math and
physical sciences program is projected to plummet by 75%, from more
than $244 million last year to just over $61 million. Materials
research would be cut by 71% to $92 million. The NSF has calculated
that its grant funding success rate will fall from an average of 26%
to just 7%.  Overall, it is estimated that the agency’s budget would
face a cut of almost 57% from over $9 billion to about $4
billion. Read more:  Chemistry World [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com


6/6/25:  NRAO Newsletter

NRAO Budget Outlook

Tony Beasley (NRAO Director)

The NRAO is continuing to operate using NSF funding received as part
of the Federal FY2025 Continuing Resolution. On May 30th, the NSF
FY2026 budget (responding to the President's Budget Request for
FY2026) was released. The NSF document proposes deep cuts (30-40%) to
the annual funding of most NSF Major Facilities, including a 34% cut
to NRAO (ranging from 19% for ALMA, to 68% for the Green Bank
Telescope). These figures represent the start of a several-month
dialog between NSF, NRAO, AUI and the community about the importance
and future of scientific user facilities in the United States, and we
are hopeful that the cuts seen in the NSF FY2026 Budget proposal will
be mitigated or dismissed.

Over the past several months we have changed our range of services
offered to the community in response to flat funding profiles:
limiting student programs, publication support, travel support,
etc. Members of the community anticipating relying on NRAO financial
support should check the relevant Observatory webpages to ensure they
understand any changes.

We are passing through a difficult time, and communications are rarely
perfect. Please don’t hesitate to contact your NRAO collaborators or
program points-of-contact if you have questions about Observatory
status and programs.


6/09/25:  FYI

SENATE PITCHING $10 BILLION BOOST FOR NASA, CLAWBACKS FROM NOAA

Senate Commerce Committee Republicans have included nearly $10 billion
for NASA in their draft contribution [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to the
reconciliation legislation [aip.us17.list-manage.com] now awaiting
Senate action. Some of the additions for NASA are at odds with the
president\371s budget request [aip.us17.list-manage.com] released May
30, including additional funds for the Gateway lunar space station,
Space Launch System rockets, and a telecommunications orbiter for use
in a Mars Sample Return mission, all of which would be terminated
under the president\371s request. The Senate bill would also increase
funding for International Space Station operations, while the
presidential request proposes \374maintaining minimal safe operations
and very limited research\375 on ISS.

Aside from the NASA provisions, the Senate bill would rescind certain
unobligated funds for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration that were appropriated by the Inflation Reduction
Act. The original appropriated amounts included $2.6 billion for
climate resilience, $150 million for facilities, $150 million for
forecasts, and $50 million for climate research, though it is unclear
what proportion of the funds is unobligated. A summary
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] of the bill calls these projects
unneeded.\375


ASTRONOMERS GATHER IN ALASKA

The 246th meeting [aip.us17.list-manage.com] of the American
Astronomical Society is taking place in Anchorage, Alaska, this
week. The event includes many sessions focused on the Vera C. Rubin
Observatory, which is due to release its first imagery to the public
on June 23. [aip.us17.list-manage.com] Three NASA town halls that were
planned as part of the event have been canceled, including one
featuring staff from the Astrophysics Division and one on the planned
Habitable Worlds Observatory, according to the online conference
program. [aip.us17.list-manage.com] A plenary session
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] on Thursday will address the current
science policy landscape and advocacy opportunities for astronomers.


6/16/25:  FYI

NSF BUDGET TARGETED FOR CLAWBACKS

The White House has set in motion an effort to freeze more than $30
billion in spending across several agencies, including the National
Science Foundation and NASA, E&E News reported
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] last week. The move affects research and
education programs at NSF that use funding left over from 2024 as well
as more than $100 million of science spending at NASA, according to
the report. The move is a precursor to the White House submitting a
spending “deferral” request to Congress, a legal mechanism to
temporarily delay the use of funds. The delayed funding could later be
included in a rescissions request like the one Congress is currently
considering, [aip.us17.list-manage.com] which would claw back $9.4
billion for foreign aid, NPR, and PBS.

NIH DOES 540° TURN ON ANTI-DEI AND BOYCOTT POLICY

Last week, the National Institutes of Health rescinded a policy
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] from April that restricts grantees from
operating diversity, equity, and inclusion programs and bars them from
boycotting Israeli entities. Unusually, NIH briefly reinstated the
policy before again rescinding [aip.us17.list-manage.com] it without
explanation. The National Science Foundation implemented a similar
restriction [aip.us17.list-manage.com] in May that is still in
effect. The DEI restrictions respond to executive orders issued by
President Donald Trump in January.


6/17/25:

From: "Modjaz, Maryam (vru7qe)" <vru7qe@virginia.edu>
To: Faculty Department <astro-faculty@virginia.edu>
Subject: [astro-faculty] AAS PPT on Congress & Federal funding process

Dear colleagues,

I hope y’all having a nice summer!

I thought you’d be interested in the attached presentation by the AAS’
Roohi Dalal on “Advocacy for the Astronomical Sciences” in the context
of the Congress & Federal funding process  that was given at the
LSST-Discovery Alliance membership meeting that UVA Astro is part of
. The PPT was given on June 11.

It also includes routes of advocacy that we can take.

Cheers,
Maryam

    [ Part 2, "LSST DA 6-11-2025 ROOHI DALAL-AAS.PDF"  Application/PDF ]
    [ (Name: "LSST DA 6-11-2025 Roohi Dalal-AAS.pdf") 1.4 MB. ]
    [ Unable to print this part. ]



6/23/25: 

From: "Modjaz, Maryam (vru7qe)" <vru7qe@virginia.edu>
To: Faculty Department <astro-faculty@virginia.edu>
Subject: [astro-faculty] FW: Update – Court Decision Issued - Indirect
    Cost Policy for Institutes of Higher Education (IHEs)

FYI – we’re back to the normal indirect cost percentage with NSF>

From: NSF eBusiness Outreach <EBUSINESS@LISTSERV.NSF.GOV> on behalf of NSF
Business Applications <NSF_Business_Applications@NSF.GOV>
Date: Monday, June 23, 2025 at 3:17 PM
Subject: Update – Court Decision Issued - Indirect Cost Policy for Institutes of
    Higher Education (IHEs)

  Issuance Date: June 23, 2025 
  Effective Date:  June 23, 2025 

  On June 20, 2025, the U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts, in
  No. 1:25-cv-11231-IT, vacated NSF’s 15% Indirect Cost Rate policy (NSF 25-034).
  In compliance with the court’s decision, NSF will not implement the policy at
  this time.


6/23/25:  FYI

A federal judge ruled last week that the National Institutes of
Health’s termination of hundreds of grants earlier this year was
illegal and ordered the agency to resume funding for the
plaintiffs. The ruling applies to parties involved in the lawsuits,
including individual researchers named in the suit, members of the
American Public Health Association, the United Auto Workers union, and
researchers at public institutions in the 22 states that sued NIH. The
plaintiffs’ lists of grants are included in court
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] orders [aip.us17.list-manage.com] released
today.

Judge William Young in Massachusetts found the terminations to be
arbitrary and capricious, adding, [aip.us17.list-manage.com] “This
represents racial discrimination and discrimination against America’s
LGBTQ community. I would be blind not to call it out.” In response, a
White House spokesperson told Fox News, [aip.us17.list-manage.com]
“Justice ceases to be administered when a judge clearly rules on the
basis of his political ideologies,” while a Department of Health and
Human Services spokesperson said the department “is exploring all
legal options, including filing an appeal and moving to stay the
order.”  The National Science Foundation is also facing lawsuits for
its grant terminations, including one filed in late May
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] by 16 states and another filed last week
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] by several groups representing teachers,
researchers, and educators. (The American Association of Physics
Teachers, one of the plaintiffs, is an AIP Member Society.) Meanwhile,
NSF’s implementation of a 15% cap on indirect costs was blocked
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] in court last Friday.


SENATE REPUBLICANS BACK HIGHER TAXES ON UNIVERSITIES, LOWER ON BUSINESS R&D

The Senate Finance Committee’s section [aip.us17.list-manage.com] of
the Republican reconciliation bill, released last week, seeks to
significantly increase excise taxes on university endowments, though
by far less than the House bill. The draft legislation would keep the
current 1.4% tax on schools with endowments worth less than $750,000
per enrolled student but would raise that rate to 4% for schools with
$750,000 to $2 million per student and 8% for schools with more than
$2 million per student. The House has proposed tax rates as high as
21% for the wealthiest schools. Both proposals would exempt religious
institutions, colleges with fewer than 500 students, and certain state
colleges.

Separately, the legislation would end the requirement that domestic
research tax deductions be amortized over several years and instead
allow those costs to be deducted in the same year in which they
occurred. Foreign-based research would still be subject to the
amortization requirement. A similar provision is included in the House
bill. The legislation would also increase the semiconductor
manufacturing investment credit [aip.us17.list-manage.com] and roll
back energy efficiency and renewable energy tax incentives. The
effects of these changes on tax revenue over ten years have been
estimated [aip.us17.list-manage.com] by the Joint Committee on
Taxation. For instance, it projects that the higher endowment taxes
would result in around $3.8 billion in revenue, while the R&D
expensing change would decrease revenue by $141 billion.


6/24/25: 

xFrom aas@aas.org Tue Jun 24 16:34:37 2025
From: American Astronomical Society <aas@aas.org>
Subject: The Reason to Continue to Advocate for Science

A message from AAS President Dara Norman, urging our diverse and inclusive
membership to take action to support science!
[on.jsp?ca=74c59e45-baf4-4b15-b1fc-71afc8318507&a=1118606474481&c=9b0fce40-5880


Dear Colleague,

Two weeks ago, we successfully hosted the 246th meeting of the
American Astronomical Society (AAS), held jointly with the AAS’s Solar
Physics and Laboratory Astrophysics Divisions in Anchorage,
Alaska. 

...But reflecting on (the Hubble era) also brings into stark view the
prospects for the road ahead in our field. Whereas the issues with the
Hubble mirror immediately gave me pause about my future in the field,
I was able to turn that into a reason to go back to graduate school to
pursue the opportunities that other newly completed telescope
projects, like the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, would bring. I am keenly
aware that currently — given the questions about the funding futures
of some of our most anticipated opportunities to explore new worlds,
old theories, and ever-expanding questions — the future is uncertain
for those in their early careers as well as those of us farther
along.  

Now is the time to remain steadfast and to do everything we can to
convince those who hold the purse strings that this work, our work, is
important. It is essential for our economy, for expanding
opportunities for innovation, and for our society to maintain its
curiosity and optimism by looking up into the heavens and wondering
what lies beyond.

However, we must also understand that having the ability, capacity,
and opportunity to do what we do — the time and space to think about
big questions, to explore the universe in all its complexity, and to
be curious about what we could learn next — is a privilege. It is not
owed to us; it is a privilege we must fight to keep. This means that
we must be humble enough to explain to others WHY it is worth
keeping. We must convince the public, who will ultimately bear the
cost of this work, that it is worth the investment. We must convince
them of the value of what it brings back to our society as a species
trying to understand our place in the cosmos, and what it brings to us
as a global community on one tiny, but — so far as we currently know —
uniquely special planet in the vastness of space. A community that
includes as many people from as many places and backgrounds as
possible AND includes those in Congress elected to represent our
interests.

This is what we are up against...this is why we must continue to write
letters to our congressional delegations. Whether or not your
representative is interested in science, there are people on Capitol
Hill who will be talking to each other about what is and isn’t
possible in a funding bill. The more communications we persistently
make, the more likely it is that our voices are heard, and the more
justification for courage we hand to our members of Congress. Even if
it seems like our letters are not read by some offices, do not give
up: it is critical to make your concerns known. Even if it is unclear
whether the staffer on the other end of the phone understands the
details of your request, do not give up: it is critical to call and
make your voice heard. Because you are not one voice: collectively, we
are many. If we do not make them aware of our voices in favor of
science and astronomy funding, it will be assumed that we are fine,
that we are good, that we don’t care. If you DO care, take action!

The advocacy work that the AAS is most suited to is supporting and
enabling its diverse and inclusive membership to take action! We are
ready and willing to help members present a collective front of
support for science; to work with other societies and organizations to
push back on proposals that will be detrimental to research,
workforce, and science education; to support appeals to the broader
public by elevating the discoveries of members and the benefits of
this work. We’re notifying members of opportunities to make their
voices heard, and we’re standing by to provide assistance and guidance
in advance of conversations that members schedule with their
representatives or with the media. Please don’t hesitate to contact
public.policy@aas.org and/or press@aas.org if you’d like help or wish
to discuss any upcoming meetings or interviews with us. And review the
slides from the Policy Plenary at AAS 246 to obtain more detailed
information on the work we’re doing.

We also need to be realistic: this work is hard and requires a
sustained effort.  We are not only trying to save our own career
opportunities, but also the character of science in the US now and
into the future. Even in the best-case scenario, funding levels are
unlikely to return to what they were before January, and we must be
prepared for that too. The threat is real, but we must use it as an
opportunity to do more for maintaining science in the US. We must use
this as a way to bring more people into an understanding of what
science is and why it is important for a society — for our country —
to make discoveries, to be curious, and to wonder collectively.

I urge you to stay in the fight… keep writing, keep calling, and keep
asking to meet! Be persistent, be relentless! The President’s Budget
is a proposal, and WE know that not all proposals get time. Congress
will soon decide what the final science allocation looks like, and we
need you to continue letting them know why this proposal for cuts to
science is as concerning as other non-science cuts. If WE don’t make
the case, no one is going to do it for us. It is up to us, so make it
count!

Go to https://aas.org/advocacy/suggested-advocacy-actions to take action now! 

   - — Dara Norman, AAS President



6/26/25: IHE.  Scholars Continue Lambasting Higher Ed While Trump
  Upends It / This year’s Heterodox Academy conference—the first since
  Republicans retook the White House—featured similar complaints about
  academe as in years past. But the federal government’s sweeping
  interventions raised questions about what’s really warranted.

A university president took the platform he was given
at the annual convening of Heterodox Academy, a viewpoint-diversity
group, to tell attendees that their long-standing gripes had found
“resonance” with those trying to destroy higher education.

“Your complaints at the Heterodox conferences for almost 10 years now
—- about being too woke, about not having enough jobs for white
people, about too many women in the academy -— have found resonance with
an authoritarian push to control our spaces,” Wesleyan University
president Michael Roth said Tuesday during a plenary panel at the
event.

“We can make nice and not say that and we won’t get investigated,” he
said. “Or we can do our job, which is to call the indecent attack on our
sector indecent, wrongheaded, lawless, authoritarian, fascistic -— choose
your words. But if you sit there and worry about the sociology
department and whether Near East studies is really antisemitic, I think
you’re doing their work of authoritarianism.”

Many in the room applauded.

At Wesleyan, Roth said, he’s tried to increase intellectual diversity
and raise awareness “about the political biases that undermine faculty
hiring, that undermine classroom discussions, that undermine the
education we want to offer.” But he said that “RIGHT NOW THAT WOULD BE
LIKE TALKING ABOUT NEEDING A BETTER MILKSHAKE WHEN THE HOUSE IS ON
FIRE,” or like complaining about corruption in Ukraine’s mining
industry or the University of Kiev’s anthropology department talking
too much about settler-colonialism.

“The federal government is trying to destroy civil society by
undermining the legitimacy of colleges and universities, of law
firms -— entertainment is on deck, and journalism,” Roth said. “And so
while we twiddle our thumbs and talk about reforming the university,
PEOPLE WHO WANT TO DESTROY THE UNIVERSITY ARE DOING SO NOT BECAUSE WE
DON’T HAVE ENOUGH REPUBLICANS AT THE TOP BUSINESS SCHOOL OR WESLEYAN’S
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. THEY WANT TO DESTROY THE UNIVERSITY BECAUSE
THAT’S HOW YOU CLAIM MORE EXECUTIVE POWER.”

President Donald Trump has ushered in a new era for those who have long
denounced academe as being intolerant of conservative views, or
antisemitic, or discriminatory against white and male applicants for
faculty jobs. While Republicans have for years passed laws in red states
curtailing teaching, tenure, shared governance and diversity, equity and
inclusion, the federal government has gone further since Trump retook
office. For five months, the Trump administration has pursued an
overhaul of higher ed using heavy-handed tactics such as cutting off
billions of dollars in research funding and attempting to deport and bar
the entry of international students and scholars for speech the
administration disagrees with.

Proponents of ideas such as viewpoint diversity, intellectual diversity,
open inquiry and civil discourse often argue that true academic freedom
supports these concepts. But what do some of them say about what’s
happening now —- significant governmental interference in higher ed, under
the premise of providing what they’ve long called for? And when
specifically is government intervention justified? This week’s
conference attempted to answer some of those questions.

...Fabio Rojas (Indiana University)...said, “Sociology is a
bait-and-switch discipline.  We say we’re a universal discipline of
social science, we say that we’re a big tent where anybody can get any
opinion published or have a good hearing,” Rojas said, but the field
instead has “an extreme emphasis on social problems.  What if we
actually tried to be better?” Rojas asked.

Rosemary Hopcroft...said that “in sociology, the received wisdom is
that sex is a social construct. So this has helped lead to some of the
worst excesses of woke ideology. I just don’t think activism should be
in sociology, period,” Hopcroft said, beyond people’s personal
lives. She said, “It’s too tempting for it to hijack everything else,
which is what’s happened.”

Rojas, when asked during the panel when he thinks it’s appropriate for
the government to intervene in higher ed curricula, said at “a private
institution, hands off, period.”... But, Rojas said, “if you’re in a
state-chartered institution, expect political interference, because
that is the definition of the institution.”

Hopcroft added that legislators “have a right to say whether they think
something is useful as part of a student’s general education or not,
given that they’re largely paying for this.”

On the presidential panel Roth sat on, moderator Nadine Strossen (New York Law
School) said universities the Trump administration has targeted “had
THEMSELVES VIOLATED ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND FREE SPEECH PRINCIPLES.  But
that problem is hardly solved by government-imposed measures that
violate those very same principles.”

...At one point, Roth referenced booths outside the grand ballroom
operated by other organizations that are pushing universities to adopt
“institutional neutrality” policies, under which institutions won’t
comment on contemporary political controversies.  “I worry that this
is a new form of conformism,” Roth said. He said he’s suspicious of
how the policies have proliferated since the Oct. 7, 2023, Hamas
attack on Israelis.

“As a heterodox person, and as a Jew, I’m very suspicious when my
compatriots find a new religion, be it viewpoint diversity or be it
institutional neutrality,” Roth said. 

...On Wednesday, during the final panel of the conference, an audience
question crystallized the past days’ debate.

“Authoritarianism is bad,” said Matthew Burgess, an assistant professor
in the University of Wyoming’s economics department. “So, what should be
done to us if not what’s currently being done to us, and what should we
do to ourselves?”

Some laughed.


6/30/25: FYI.  NSF TO BE BOOTED FROM HEADQUARTERS, AIMS TO STAY IN VA

The Department of Housing and Urban Development plans to take over the
National Science Foundation’s headquarters building in Alexandria,
Virginia, officials announced at a surprise press conference
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] last week. Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin (R)
said at the event that some of the potential sites in Virginia
originally offered to HUD would be suggested to NSF, which currently
has more than 1,800 employees and moved to Alexandria from nearby
Arlington in 2017. Many NSF staff gathered at the press conference to
protest the decision, [aip.us17.list-manage.com] and the agency’s
union blasted [aip.us17.list-manage.com] the takeover. “NSF employees
are being displaced with no plan, no communication, and no respect,”
the union stated. The union also said it was told HUD Secretary Scott
Turner’s plans include construction of a new executive dining room,
reserved parking spaces for his five cars, and a potential gym for him
and his family. Turner denied these claims at the press conference and
defended the move as necessary given that HUD’s current home in
Washington, DC, has long been in a state of disrepair.

Democrats in Congress were quick to criticize the move, with Rep. Zoe
Lofgren (D-CA) [aip.us17.list-manage.com] and Sen. Maria Cantwell
(D-WA) [aip.us17.list-manage.com] condemning the “luxury upgrades” for
the HUD secretary. Democrats from Virginia’s congressional delegation
are seeking details [aip.us17.list-manage.com] about NSF’s
displacement from the General Services Administration, which manages
federal real estate. GSA official Michael Peters said at the press
conference that the relocation will save taxpayers $500 million in
deferred maintenance and an additional $56 million in annual operating
and maintenance expenses, while Sen. Mark Warner (D-VA) reacted
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] by noting GSA has not offered an estimate
of how much it will cost to relocate NSF. NSF is aiming to remain in
northern Virginia and a move outside the DMV area is not under
consideration, according to an internal memo sent last week by the
agency’s acting director.

DOD, NOAA, AND NIST DETAIL MAJOR PROPOSED SCIENCE CUTS

The Trump administration is asking Congress to cut the Department of
Defense’s basic research programs by 9% to $2.26 billion and its
applied research programs by 8% to $5.7 billion for fiscal year 2025,
according to new budget request documentation
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] released last week. (These figures exclude
funds the administration presumes will be provided through the
reconciliation process.) The budget document also indicates that DOD
used the wide discretion provided by Congress in its fiscal year 2025
appropriations to reduce the department’s applied research budget by
17% from fiscal year 2024 to 2025.  The Commerce Department has also
just finished posting its budget request documents,
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] including those for the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration [aip.us17.list-manage.com] and the
National Institute of Standards and
Technology. [aip.us17.list-manage.com] The administration proposes
eliminating NOAA’s Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research and
transferring some of its programs to the National Ocean Service and
the National Weather Service. In total, the document calls for cutting
more than 2,200 positions from NOAA, roughly 18% of the agency. At
NIST, the request details how the administration’s proposed cut of
around 30% to the agency would require slashing hundreds of staff
positions from the agency’s laboratory programs.

Meanwhile, House appropriators are gearing up to advance their own
science spending proposals.  They have scheduled
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] markups for next week that will cover the
Department of Energy, National Science Foundation, NOAA, NIST, and
NASA.

The Trump administration has cut subscriptions
    [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to Springer Nature journals held by
NIH, DOE, and USDA, according to reporting by Science.


JULY 

7/1/25: ArsTechnica.  RFK Jr.’s health department calls Nature “junk
  science,” cancels subscriptions / The move comes after RFK
  Jr. called top medical journals "corrupt."

Scientists at several federal agencies are losing access to scientific
literature published by Springer Nature, which produces the
prestigious journal Nature among many other high-profile titles.

...According to the news outlet, spokespeople for NASA and the US
Department of Agriculture (USDA) confirmed that agency scientists
would no longer have access to Springer Nature journals. A USDA
spokesperson said that it "has cancelled all contracts and
subscriptions to Springer Nature. The journal [sic] is exorbitantly
expensive and is not a good use of taxpayer funds." A government
spending database also shows the Department of Energy (DOE) has
dropped contracts with the publisher.

When Nature news first reached out to the National Institutes of
Health (NIH)—which is the top funding agency for biomedical research
in the world—it appeared that its access to Nature journals was not on
the chopping block. But, hours later, Andrew Nixon, the top
spokesperson for the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS),
which oversees the NIH, said: "All contracts with Springer Nature are
terminated or no longer active. Precious taxpayer dollars should be
[sic] not be used on unused subscriptions to junk science."

The move comes after HHS Secretary and anti-vaccine activist Robert
F. Kennedy Jr. said on a May 27 podcast that prestigious medical
journals are "corrupt."  "We’re probably going to stop publishing in
the Lancet, New England Journal of Medicine, JAMA, and those other
journals because they’re all corrupt," he said. He accused the
journals collectively of being a "vessel for pharmaceutical
propaganda." He went on to say that "unless these journals change
dramatically," the federal government would "stop NIH scientists from
publishing there" and create "in-house" journals instead.

Comments...

People knew all about Project 2025 before the election. They ignored
it. People knew JFKjr was a monster, his own family said so. They
still voted for Trump.

He is going to cause so many additional deaths.
 
And by “corrupt” he means “refuses to publish false anti-vax
narrative”.  We are being governed by the least competent, most
vindictive gang of jackasses ever put into office. And things are only
going to get worse.

And this is how a dark age begins. Does he also think BMJ and JAMA are
"junk science"?  EDIT just finished the article.... he thinks they are
"corrupt". lol. Good luck America.
 
They're not going for anything, Lysenkoism or otherwise. They want
void. Absence. Nothing.  A whole bunch of scientists have already left
Federal institutions like NIH. A megacrapton more are out looking for
an exit ramp. We're losing people who contribute enormously to the
health and well-being of the US.

"Republicans are busily committing political suicide. We just need to
keep feeding them the rope that they so stupidly accept." -- I wish
that were true, but as Texas shows, they can continue to blame
Democrats for their own failures for decades.  What they are
effectively committing is genocide of their own supporters. And they
are attempting to take everyone else down with them.

If it's also NASA and Agriculture and Energy, it's not just Kennedy's
particular crackpottery, but instead has to be viewed as part of the
administrations overall war on science. I assume they're aiming for a
modern version of Lysenkoism, where whatever semblance science is
allowed to exist does so in explicit service of the regime's ideology.

FFS the head of the FDA doesn't believe in germs and effectively is
pushing global genocide. The fourth estate in general has simply
failed.

From the 9th through the 12th centuries, Islamic society was among the
world's most advanced and liberal. Science, scholarship, diversity
were all encouraged. Scholars attribute multiple causes for why it
ended, but for me the most important causes were a shift towards more
conservative religious interpretations and resistance to scientific
and philosophical inquiry. When I learned decades ago about the
Islamic Golen age and its end, I wondered how a society could allow
its people to ruin it and was grateful I didn't live in such a foolish
society. That was decades ago, and, hooboy, I was naive! So here I am
in a society that at one time was the most advanced in the world doing
the exact same thing as what happened with Islam almost 1000 years
ago; only because this is Amurika, we have domestic terrorists like
Kennedy wrecking everything faster and with greater stupidity.  Well
I'm sure this country will get everything back on track real soon,
just like what happened with Islamic societies. Oh, wait....

What's really crazy to think is, the thing that immediately
precipitated this turn, probably more than anything else, is that a
bunch of selfish a-holes just couldn't bring themselves to wear masks
for a couple years so they wouldn't get their friends and neighbors
sick with a deadly disease. Rather than take a completely
inconsequential action to keep everyone safe, people chose instead to
politicize it and are now dismantling the entire medical establishment
just so there's no one left to tell them that they're wrong.

They quite literally and quite seriously want to bring modern America
down in ruins, so they can establish an oligarchic, techno-feudal
theocratic ("Christian Nationalist", "Dominionist",
"Gilead". whatever) state in its place.  I would not be surprised if
many of the behind-scenes actors (not just Steve Bannon) are
deliberately and consciously following a Leninist strategy of
deliberately making conditions worse, so that the masses will
consequently look to them for "relief" from their problems.
 


7/1/25: ArsTechnica.  Eric Berger, White House works to ground NASA
science missions before Congress can act / "We would be turning off
some fabulous missions that are doing extremely well."

In another sign that the Trump White House is aggressively moving to
slash NASA’s science programs, dozens of mission leaders have been asked
to prepare "closeout" plans by the end of next week.

The new directive came from NASA's senior leadership on Monday, which is
acting on behalf of the White House Office of Management and Budget.
Copies of these memos, which appear to vary a little by department, were
reviewed by Ars. The detailed closeout plans called for must be prepared
by as soon as July 9 for some missions, which has left principal
investigators scrambling due to the tight deadline and the July 4
holiday weekend.

Projects should prepare their plans assuming closeout direction is given
on October 1, 2025, one of the NASA memos states. Missions in
operations—that is to say, spacecraft whizzing around the Solar System
conducting science right now—should "assume closeout is complete within
3 months."

The memos are careful to state that the preparation of these closeout
plans is for the purposes of a "planning exercise only." However,
multiple scientists familiar with the new directive from NASA's
leadership do not believe these closeout plans are merely for planning
purposes.

Instead, based on the budget process to date and statements from the
White House, they view the memos as an effort by the Trump
administration to move forward with canceling as many NASA science
missions as possible before Congress passes a budget for the upcoming
fiscal year, 2026. This fiscal year begins on October 1, three months
from today.


    Science at risk

The Trump White House released its proposed budget for NASA a little
more than a month ago, seeking to reduce NASA's budget by about 24
percent, from $24.8 billion this year to $18.8 billion in fiscal year
2026. Some areas within the budget were hit harder than others,
particularly the Science Mission Directorate, which sustained nearly 50
percent in proposed cuts.

The space agency has 124 science missions in development, prime
operations, or extended operations. Effectively, the proposed cuts would
cancel 41 of these missions, and another 17 would see their funding
zeroed out in the near future. Nearly half of NASA's science missions
would therefore end, and dozens more would receive budget cuts of 20–40
percent.

This includes some high-profile casualties, including NASA's only
mission at Jupiter, an effort to explore an asteroid that will fly
extremely close to Earth in 2029, two promising missions to Venus, and
an effort to return samples from Mars.

"We would be turning off some fabulous missions that are doing extremely
well," said Jim Green, a physicist who led NASA's Planetary Science
Program for 12 years before his retirement in 2022.

Normally, after the White House proposes a budget for the upcoming
fiscal year, it is considered by appropriators in Congress responsible
for setting funding levels and publishing a budget. However, in recent
years, Congress has been unable to agree upon a budget and pass it
before the beginning of the next fiscal year. This has led to a
"continuing resolution" in which, generally, NASA missions continue to
receive funding consistent with budget levels set during the previous
fiscal year.

However, multiple sources indicated to Ars that may not happen this
year, and the new memos offer an important clue in this regard.


    Making missions go dark

The memos were sent to the principal investigators of the missions that
the White House budget seeks to cancel. On one hand, it is prudent to
have a plan of action in place should these missions actually be
canceled due to a new budget, assuming one is in place by October 1. It
is NASA's job to execute the budget it is given.

But there very likely is a more cynical plan at play here. The Office of
Management and Budget, led by Russ Vought, has been seeking to cut the
US government's science portfolio across the board, and it fully expects
a continuing resolution to be adopted as Congress almost certainly won't
have a budget signed.

The congressional committees have been paralyzed, to some degree, by the
Trump administration's full-court press to pass the "One Big Beautiful
Bill," which exists outside of the traditional budget process.
Congressional work to set the budget for fiscal year 2026 remains in its
early stages, and with summer recesses looming, passage of any bill will
almost certainly require many months.

Amid this uncertainty, Vought appears to be moving to shut down as many
of these missions as possible.


    The PBR is the plan

How will Vought and his office accomplish this? Effectively, they seek
to turn the president's budget request into the operating plan for
NASA—instead of a continuing resolution—in the absence of a fiscal year
2026 budget.

This has already been communicated to NASA's field center directors.
Recently, according to multiple sources, NASA's chief of staff, Brian
Hughes, told these center leaders that the president's budget request
would soon become their operating plans. Hughes, who worked on Trump's
2024 campaign, is one of the senior political leaders running NASA in
the absence of a confirmed administrator.

(*Update*: After publication of this article, NASA press secretary
Bethany Stevens denied Hughes had said this. "This is either a
misinterpretation or mischaracterization of Brian's words," she said.
"Brian has issued no guidance stating that the PBR will become the
operating plan for NASA prior to Congressional authorization of a budget.")

During a typical budget year, NASA officials submit an operating plan to
Congress so authorizers and appropriators know what is happening at the
agency as part of the budget-making process. During this give-and-take,
appropriators provide feedback; i.e., "continue working on such and
such" because it is the intent of Congress to continue funding that
activity regardless of the White House's proposed budget. For example,
this process saved NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory from having its
operations rapidly curtailed last year.

NASA typically complies with guidance from Congress since it receives
its budget from Congress. (Really, you do not want to bite the hand that
feeds.) However, this year's process is not expected to be normal, and
there is no legal requirement for NASA (or other federal agencies) to
consider congressional feedback on their operating plans.

This year, in fact, the Office of Management and Budget has even stopped
NASA from submitting operational plans to Congress.

"This is yet another bad faith move by the administration, which seems
hell-bent on attacking science and the future of American innovation,"
said Rep. George Whitesides (D-Calif.), who previously served as NASA's
chief of staff. "To go around Congress, and the committee of
jurisdiction that I sit on, to enact their radical agenda that will make
us less safe, less competitive, and less able to respond to threats is
not only dangerous, it will cede all ground to our adversaries like China."


    Will the last planetary scientist please turn out the lights?

How will this play out?

There are multiple strategies, and some of them are likely to end up
in court fights. Philosophically, Vought believes strongly that the
president should have more authority to direct federal spending. And
he appears likely to try to force the issue this year. Using tactics
such as recission -— essentially ordering federal agencies to freeze
spending—and impoundment, Vought will seek to implement the priorities
in the president's budget request, which his office wrote.

Beginning October 1, without a fiscal year 2026 budget in place, NASA
may be directed to start following the closeout plans submitted this
month by principal investigators and turning missions off. That means
the lights go out at Jupiter, telescopes stop gathering data across the
Solar System, and so on for dozens of missions.

And once those missions are gone, they're almost impossible to bring
back—even if Congress were inclined to restore funding months later with
a new budget.

"If there’s not much hope to restart a mission, the people who are
managing Juno, New Horizons, and other missions are going to be looking
for their next job," Green said. "They’re going to be gone. Within a few
months, you won’t be able to get the expertise back. And without the
expertise, you don’t have the ability to run the mission safely."

108 Comments

making smart and good people angry by destroying the things they care
about plays well with rural, white, evangelical voters
 
Science is inherently anti-heirarchical. Knowledge is actually
power.  Many of these freaks in government have resentments they
literally pin as starting with the French Revolution, European
Enlightenment and the subsequent decline of the power of nobility
across Europe.  The deepest ideologues driving this stuff - the
Voughts, the Millers, the Vances, and outside of gov't the Thiels, the
Yarvins - literally want to roll back the entirety of the 21st and 20th
centuries, and reset to an era of clean, clear heirarchies, strictly
enforced religious ideology, etc etc.  Everything they do is in
service of that. They do not like that American by-and-large work in
knowledge jobs, and that those workers do things like tell their
bosses to be less racist or stop sexually harrassing people. They
don't like it one bit. They want us - as Commerce Secretary Howard
Lutnick literally said screwing in tiny screws to iPhones for
companies that have to put suicide cages on the windows. They want us
uneducated, poor, and subservient to them. They don't think we are
worthy of anything better.  They do not believe that rising tides lift
all boats. They don't care that they are richer than God today because
the equalification of American has lead to wider and broader and
deeper prosperity overall. They see Russia as an ideal state. Mostly
poor, but ruled with an iron fist by very obscenely rich men. They
will destroy anything that doesn't serve that goal.

As an European i just watch in total disbelief. Since i as a kid in
the seventies got interested in space and astronomy, Nasa has stood
out as a light house for science, technology and knowledge about
space. Something that in my eyes makes America great.  I find it hard
to belive that all this is crushed under the complete chaotic
ignorance and stupidity of this government.  Madness just Madness.

There is a Republican state representative that literally just had
complications during pregnancy that arose because of Florida's
anti-abortion laws. She nearly died, and promptly blamed "the left"
for it all.  That is to say no, ideological trolls do not admit
anything, ever.
 
Christo-Fascism is not interested in space exploration, folks. Not
even interested in knowing about the weather or even if anyone is
keeping science alive.  They have a lot of big plans for you, though.

What's the difference between the Religious Right and the Taliban?
About 6000 miles.
 
This administration is pretty focused on "flag planting" missions to
the moon and Mars, and they're sucking the science budget dry to get
there while also DOGEing NASA's budget. There is also a widespread
belief that new private space is moving faster and is more capable
than old space, as well as having access to capital markets for
funding. This may or may not be true, but I'm sure that's the advice
Trump is getting.

At least when Carter suggested closing NASA, he was willing to listen
when the militpointed out that it was essential for national
security. Trump? Not so much.  We are going to be decades recovering
from these cuts. We will lose some craft entirely and others will only
return a small fraction of what we had hoped to get. Just as bad as
the damage this does to our science is what it does to our
international relations. No country will want to partner with us
simply because the project might get canceled just because Trump got
mad one day.  And then there is the brain-drain that this has already
started to happen. Our best and brightest are going to go to other
countries to work. Friendly ones if we are lucky, unfriendly if we
aren’t.  2026 and the Democrats getting a majority in both the House
and the Senate cannot come soon enough.

As someone right-leaning myself I don't really get it either. I
honestly feel like its a personal vendetta by someone in Trump's
cabinet or close advisors that's pushing for all this. Maybe Sergio
Gor, maybe someone else. It doesn't really save that much money and
doesn't really do much. Trump doesn't seem to particularly care
because he's probably just ignorant about the whole thing. So it's
someone else that really has their eye set on vengeance for
something. Doesn't make any sense.

     What's there to make sense of?  Republican policy, since at least
     1984, has been to shred the federal government and all that it
     does. This is the inevitable conclusion of that goal.

Nah, you won't be able to maintain a big military with this
administration. Your military will degrade over time as skilled
technicians retire, and home-schooled morons (because College is
woke!) take their place. And it wouldn't surprise me if people in
charge of warehouses take a leaf from their Russian comrades and start
to sell things unofficially, because that's how things roll now. The
fish rots from the head, and the head is - even now - insanely
corrupt.
 
It's hard to post anything that both accurately represents what I'd
like to scream out, and would stay up longer than 30 seconds.  May
eventually the sulfuric acidic fires from hell be unleashed on these
subhuman troglodytes.  But this is pretty much exactly what I
anticipated and predicted through some post that I'll not be able to
retrieve, about 6 months ago or so. People should understand that this
is all-out-war, and gloves will have to go.



7/2/25:  USRA newsletter

      From: "Hammond, Eric S." <ehammond@usra.edu>
      Date: July 2, 2025 at 16:12:12 EDT
      To: Stephan McCandliss <stephan.mccandliss@jhu.edu>
      Subject: USRA Legislative Update from Washington

      1. Call to Action: Contacting Your Member of Congress

      Now is a critical time for researchers and university
      representatives to contact their Members of Congress and advocate
      for strong federal support for science. Congress will soon debate
      the FY 2026 funding levels for NASA, the National Science Foundation
      (NSF), and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
      (NOAA), all of which face proposed severe reductions.

      A brief phone call or short personalized email can make a
      difference. The sample message below may be adapted as needed:

      Dear Representative [Name],
      I am a [title] at [University] in [City], urging you to support full
      funding for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate, NSF, and NOAA in the
      FY 2026 appropriations process. The Administration’s proposed cuts
      would significantly harm scientific research, student training, and
      America’s innovation base. [Optional: Our institution has [X]
      projects and [Y] employees, [Z] students supported by these
      programs.]
      I appreciate your support of science and education.
      Sincerely, [Your Name]

      To identify your Representative, visit house.gov and enter your ZIP
      code in the “Find Your Representative” tool located in the upper
      right corner of the homepage. You may also call the U.S. Capitol
      Switchboard at (202) 224-3121 to be connected directly to your
      Representative’s office. Many professional societies are issuing
      similar calls to action—coordinated engagement from the academic
      community is both timely and critical.

      If you require additional assistance in contacting your senator or
      representative, please do not hesitate to reply directly to this
      email, and I will be happy to help.

      2. Deep Cuts Proposed for NASA, NSF, and NOAA

      The Administration’s FY 2026 budget request proposes historic cuts
      to federal science agencies. NASA faces an overall cut of nearly
      25%, including almost a 50% reduction to the Science Mission
      Directorate (SMD)—the steepest decline since the early days of the
      space era. High-profile missions, such as the Mars Sample Return,
      the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, and upcoming Venus missions,
      are all at risk. Each of NASA’s four science divisions—Astrophysics,
      Planetary Science, Earth Science, and Heliophysics—would be cut to
      historic lows. In addition, NASA’s STEM education programs,
      including Space Grant and EPSCoR, are slated for elimination.

      NSF would see its budget halved—from roughly $9 billion to under $4
      billion—under this proposal. Internal agency planning indicates all
      37 disciplinary divisions would be eliminated, with widespread
      restructuring and funding freezes. New grantmaking has slowed, and
      core programs, such as the Graduate Research Fellowship Program,
      have already undergone significant reductions.

      NOAA’s proposal is similarly stark. The budget eliminates the Office
      of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), effectively dismantling
      NOAA’s primary arm for climate and weather science. University-based
      Sea Grant programs and coastal resilience initiatives would be
      terminated. Other NOAA offices, including the National Ocean
      Service, face potential reductions of up to 50%. Weather satellite
      programs developed jointly with NASA would be scaled back or
      canceled.

      Implications for Universities: These cuts would have a profound
      impact on university-led research, training, and facilities.
      Canceled missions and frozen grants threaten research continuity,
      graduate and postdoctoral support, and hands-on STEM education.
      While the Administration sets the proposal, Congress controls the
      outcome. Growing bipartisan concern suggests lawmakers may push
      back, but action from the academic community is vital.

      NASA’s FY2026 Request:

      image002.png


      3. House Appropriations Markup Looms: Science Funding at Stake

      Congress has begun work on the Fiscal Year (FY) 2026 appropriations
      process, which will set funding levels for NASA, the National
      Science Foundation (NSF), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
      Administration (NOAA), and other key science agencies. The House
      Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and
      Related Agencies (CJS) is scheduled to mark up its FY 2026 bill on
      Monday, July 7, 2025. [See more here.] This markup begins the first
      formal step in Congress’s response to the Administration’s budget
      request, which proposes significant reductions to multiple science
      programs.

      As of this writing, the draft text of the House bill has not been
      made public, and there are indications that the full language may
      not be released by the time of the July 7 markup. Instead, it may
      become available later in the week, when the full committee markup
      is expected to take place on Thursday, July 10. [See more here.] As
      a result, any current reporting on specific funding levels for
      NASA’s Science Mission Directorate, STEM engagement programs (such
      as Space Grant), NSF, or NOAA remains speculative.

      What we do know is that Congress is working under strict budget
      limits set by the Fiscal Responsibility Act, a law that caps how
      much the government can spend on non-defense programs—like NASA,
      NSF, and NOAA—for Fiscal Year 2026. These caps leave very little
      room for increases and will force lawmakers to make tough choices.
      Without strong public input, there’s a real risk that science
      programs will be scaled back or underfunded.

      Because final funding levels have not been released—and rumors
      suggest the full bill text may not be available until later this
      week—the next few days are a critical time for advocacy. Engagement
      from universities and researchers is essential. Speaking up now can
      help shape how Congress prioritizes science, both as the House
      begins its process and as the Senate develops its version and
      negotiations between the two chambers begin later this summer.


      4. Senate Budget Action: NASA Gets Boost via Reconciliation | Golden
      Dome Initiative Funded

      On July 1, the Senate passed its budget reconciliation bill—dubbed
      the “One Big Beautiful Bill”—which provides nearly $10 billion in
      supplemental funding for NASA’s human spaceflight program and
      establishes a new “Golden Dome” national missile defense initiative.
      The NASA funding targets activities such as Artemis, the lunar
      Gateway, Mars exploration, and key infrastructure upgrades—many of
      which faced sharp reductions or elimination in the Administration’s
      FY 2026 budget request.

      This reconciliation package operates outside the regular
      appropriations process and provides one-time mandatory funding for
      exploration efforts; however, it does not include support for
      discretionary science programs, such as NASA’s Science Mission
      Directorate, NSF, or NOAA. The Administration’s FY2026 proposed cuts
      to these programs, released months earlier, remain unaddressed by
      the reconciliation bill. The two tracks—appropriations and
      reconciliation—are procedurally distinct, but the resulting funding
      landscape has raised questions about how they may interact.

      While the reconciliation funds are not meant to replace base
      appropriations, some concern remains that their existence could
      create political cover for appropriators to limit NASA’s
      discretionary topline. However, Senate appropriators, in particular,
      have expressed strong interest in restoring science funding and
      protecting against what they see as disproportionate cuts. There is
      no procedural requirement to offset the reconciliation funding with
      reductions elsewhere, and many in Congress emphasize that
      exploration supplements should not come at the expense of research,
      education, and technology development.

      Ultimately, the reconciliation bill provides a critical boost to
      human spaceflight, but leaves the fate of core NASA science programs
      to the regular Commerce-Justice-Science appropriations process.
      Whether appropriators choose to reinvest in those areas will depend
      heavily on congressional negotiations and continued advocacy from
      the scientific and academic communities.

      At the time of this writing, the bill’s fate in the House remains
      far from certain. Despite Senate approval, reports highlight growing
      GOP resistance, casting doubt on final passage before the July 4
      deadline.


      5. NASA Administrator Nomination Withdrawn

      At the end of May, the President unexpectedly withdrew his
      nomination of Jared Isaacman for NASA Administrator, citing a
      “thorough review of prior associations.” Isaacman—a private
      astronaut and entrepreneur—had already passed the Senate Commerce
      Committee and was awaiting confirmation. His withdrawal leaves NASA
      without a permanent leader.

      A new nominee has not been announced, though the White House has
      promised a replacement “soon” who will be “mission aligned.” Until
      then, NASA is led by an acting administrator—typically the most
      senior career official—who may delay major decisions,
      reorganizations, or long-term strategy.

      This leadership gap arises as NASA faces significant budgetary
      pressures and a potential reorganization amid ongoing federal
      reviews. In response, NASA has initiated several voluntary
      workforce-shaping measures, including the Deferred Resignation
      Program (DRP), the Voluntary Early Retirement Authority (VERA), and
      the Voluntary Separation Incentive Payment (VSIP). Eligible civil
      service employees may apply for these programs through July 25,
      2025. They will continue to receive pay and benefits—often extending
      into January 2026—as NASA streamlines its workforce without
      resorting to involuntary layoffs.

      Engagement with new leadership, once appointed, will be essential to
      reinforcing the value of academic partnerships and science programs.


      Conclusion

      Federal science programs face a defining moment. The proposed FY
      2026 budget would severely undermine research, education, and
      long-term innovation—but nothing is final. Time remains for advocacy
      to shape the outcome. Meanwhile, NASA’s leadership uncertainty adds
      another dimension to the policy environment.

      USRA, in coordination with its Issues and Program Committee (IPC),
      will continue to monitor developments and advocate for our
      community. We urge COI members to share this information with their
      colleagues and utilize the provided tools to contact their
      Congressional Representatives.

      Thank you for your continued efforts and commitment.



7/3/25: 

xFrom rwo@virginia.edu Thu Jul  3 09:07:55 2025
Date: Thu, 3 Jul 2025 09:07:53
From: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
To: "astro-alldept@virginia.edu" <astro-alldept@virginia.edu>
Cc: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
Subject: Federal science budget reaching critical phase

Federal budgeting for science in FY2026 is reaching a critical phase
over the next month (regardless of how quickly the "Big Beautiful
Bill" passes Congress).

I'm forwarding information on where things stand for NASA, NSF, and
NOAA from the latest USRA newsletter.

       Cheers (sort-of),

           RWO

===================================================================

       USRA newsletter

       From: "Hammond, Eric S." <ehammond@usra.edu>
       Date: July 2, 2025 at 16:12:12 EDT
       To: Stephan McCandliss <stephan.mccandliss@jhu.edu>
       Subject: USRA Legislative Update from Washington

       1. Call to Action: Contacting Your Member of Congress

       Now is a critical time for researchers and university
       representatives to contact their Members of Congress and advocate
       for strong federal support for science. Congress will soon debate
       the FY 2026 funding levels for NASA, the National Science Foundation
       (NSF), and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
       (NOAA), all of which face proposed severe reductions.

       A brief phone call or short personalized email can make a
       difference. The sample message below may be adapted as needed:

       Dear Representative [Name],
       I am a [title] at [University] in [City], urging you to support full
       funding for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate, NSF, and NOAA in the
       FY 2026 appropriations process. The Administration’s proposed cuts
       would significantly harm scientific research, student training, and
       America’s innovation base. [Optional: Our institution has [X]
       projects and [Y] employees, [Z] students supported by these
       programs.]
       I appreciate your support of science and education.
       Sincerely, [Your Name]

       To identify your Representative, visit house.gov and enter your ZIP
       code in the “Find Your Representative” tool located in the upper
       right corner of the homepage. You may also call the U.S. Capitol
       Switchboard at (202) 224-3121 to be connected directly to your
       Representative’s office. Many professional societies are issuing
       similar calls to action—coordinated engagement from the academic
       community is both timely and critical.

       If you require additional assistance in contacting your senator or
       representative, please do not hesitate to reply directly to this
       email, and I will be happy to help.


       2. Deep Cuts Proposed for NASA, NSF, and NOAA

       The Administration’s FY 2026 budget request proposes historic cuts
       to federal science agencies. NASA faces an overall cut of nearly
       25%, including almost a 50% reduction to the Science Mission
       Directorate (SMD)—the steepest decline since the early days of the
       space era. High-profile missions, such as the Mars Sample Return,
       the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, and upcoming Venus missions,
       are all at risk. Each of NASA’s four science divisions—Astrophysics,
       Planetary Science, Earth Science, and Heliophysics—would be cut to
       historic lows. In addition, NASA’s STEM education programs,
       including Space Grant and EPSCoR, are slated for elimination.

       NSF would see its budget halved—from roughly $9 billion to under $4
       billion—under this proposal. Internal agency planning indicates all
       37 disciplinary divisions would be eliminated, with widespread
       restructuring and funding freezes. New grantmaking has slowed, and
       core programs, such as the Graduate Research Fellowship Program,
       have already undergone significant reductions.

       NOAA’s proposal is similarly stark. The budget eliminates the Office
       of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), effectively dismantling
       NOAA’s primary arm for climate and weather science. University-based
       Sea Grant programs and coastal resilience initiatives would be
       terminated. Other NOAA offices, including the National Ocean
       Service, face potential reductions of up to 50%. Weather satellite
       programs developed jointly with NASA would be scaled back or
       canceled.

       Implications for Universities: These cuts would have a profound
       impact on university-led research, training, and facilities.
       Canceled missions and frozen grants threaten research continuity,
       graduate and postdoctoral support, and hands-on STEM education.
       While the Administration sets the proposal, Congress controls the
       outcome. Growing bipartisan concern suggests lawmakers may push
       back, but action from the academic community is vital.

       NASA’s FY2026 Request:
       image002.png


       3. House Appropriations Markup Looms: Science Funding at Stake

       Congress has begun work on the Fiscal Year (FY) 2026 appropriations
       process, which will set funding levels for NASA, the National
       Science Foundation (NSF), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
       Administration (NOAA), and other key science agencies. The House
       Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and
       Related Agencies (CJS) is scheduled to mark up its FY 2026 bill on
       Monday, July 7, 2025. [See more here.] This markup begins the first
       formal step in Congress’s response to the Administration’s budget
       request, which proposes significant reductions to multiple science
       programs.

       As of this writing, the draft text of the House bill has not been
       made public, and there are indications that the full language may
       not be released by the time of the July 7 markup. Instead, it may
       become available later in the week, when the full committee markup
       is expected to take place on Thursday, July 10. [See more here.] As
       a result, any current reporting on specific funding levels for
       NASA’s Science Mission Directorate, STEM engagement programs (such
       as Space Grant), NSF, or NOAA remains speculative.

       What we do know is that Congress is working under strict budget
       limits set by the Fiscal Responsibility Act, a law that caps how
       much the government can spend on non-defense programs—like NASA,
       NSF, and NOAA—for Fiscal Year 2026. These caps leave very little
       room for increases and will force lawmakers to make tough choices.
       Without strong public input, there’s a real risk that science
       programs will be scaled back or underfunded.

       Because final funding levels have not been released—and rumors
       suggest the full bill text may not be available until later this
       week—the next few days are a critical time for advocacy. Engagement
       from universities and researchers is essential. Speaking up now can
       help shape how Congress prioritizes science, both as the House
       begins its process and as the Senate develops its version and
       negotiations between the two chambers begin later this summer.


       4. Senate Budget Action: NASA Gets Boost via Reconciliation | Golden
       Dome Initiative Funded

       On July 1, the Senate passed its budget reconciliation bill—dubbed
       the “One Big Beautiful Bill”—which provides nearly $10 billion in
       supplemental funding for NASA’s human spaceflight program and
       establishes a new “Golden Dome” national missile defense initiative.
       The NASA funding targets activities such as Artemis, the lunar
       Gateway, Mars exploration, and key infrastructure upgrades—many of
       which faced sharp reductions or elimination in the Administration’s
       FY 2026 budget request.

       This reconciliation package operates outside the regular
       appropriations process and provides one-time mandatory funding for
       exploration efforts; however, it does not include support for
       discretionary science programs, such as NASA’s Science Mission
       Directorate, NSF, or NOAA. The Administration’s FY2026 proposed cuts
       to these programs, released months earlier, remain unaddressed by
       the reconciliation bill. The two tracks—appropriations and
       reconciliation—are procedurally distinct, but the resulting funding
       landscape has raised questions about how they may interact.

       While the reconciliation funds are not meant to replace base
       appropriations, some concern remains that their existence could
       create political cover for appropriators to limit NASA’s
       discretionary topline. However, Senate appropriators, in particular,
       have expressed strong interest in restoring science funding and
       protecting against what they see as disproportionate cuts. There is
       no procedural requirement to offset the reconciliation funding with
       reductions elsewhere, and many in Congress emphasize that
       exploration supplements should not come at the expense of research,
       education, and technology development.

       Ultimately, the reconciliation bill provides a critical boost to
       human spaceflight, but leaves the fate of core NASA science programs
       to the regular Commerce-Justice-Science appropriations process.
       Whether appropriators choose to reinvest in those areas will depend
       heavily on congressional negotiations and continued advocacy from
       the scientific and academic communities.

       At the time of this writing, the bill’s fate in the House remains
       far from certain. Despite Senate approval, reports highlight growing
       GOP resistance, casting doubt on final passage before the July 4
       deadline.


       5. NASA Administrator Nomination Withdrawn

       At the end of May, the President unexpectedly withdrew his
       nomination of Jared Isaacman for NASA Administrator, citing a
       “thorough review of prior associations.” Isaacman—a private
       astronaut and entrepreneur—had already passed the Senate Commerce
       Committee and was awaiting confirmation. His withdrawal leaves NASA
       without a permanent leader.

       A new nominee has not been announced, though the White House has
       promised a replacement “soon” who will be “mission aligned.” Until
       then, NASA is led by an acting administrator—typically the most
       senior career official—who may delay major decisions,
       reorganizations, or long-term strategy.

       This leadership gap arises as NASA faces significant budgetary
       pressures and a potential reorganization amid ongoing federal
       reviews. In response, NASA has initiated several voluntary
       workforce-shaping measures, including the Deferred Resignation
       Program (DRP), the Voluntary Early Retirement Authority (VERA), and
       the Voluntary Separation Incentive Payment (VSIP). Eligible civil
       service employees may apply for these programs through July 25,
       2025. They will continue to receive pay and benefits—often extending
       into January 2026—as NASA streamlines its workforce without
       resorting to involuntary layoffs.

       Engagement with new leadership, once appointed, will be essential to
       reinforcing the value of academic partnerships and science programs.


       Conclusion

       Federal science programs face a defining moment. The proposed FY
       2026 budget would severely undermine research, education, and
       long-term innovation—but nothing is final. Time remains for advocacy
       to shape the outcome. Meanwhile, NASA’s leadership uncertainty adds
       another dimension to the policy environment.

       USRA, in coordination with its Issues and Program Committee (IPC),
       will continue to monitor developments and advocate for our
       community. We urge COI members to share this information with their
       colleagues and utilize the provided tools to contact their
       Congressional Representatives.

       Thank you for your continued efforts and commitment.

__________________________________________________________________________


     6  Pending Legislation for NASA in Congress

       1. H.R. 4065 — Transfer Discovery to Houston (June 20, 2025)

        o  Sponsor: Rep. Randy Weber Sr. [R‑TX‑14]
        o  Committee: House Science, Space & Technology; House
           Administration
        o  Latest Action: Referred to committees on June 20, 2025
        o  Summary: Directs transfer of the Shuttle Discovery from the
           Smithsonian’s Udvar‑Hazy Center (VA) to NASA’s Johnson Space
           Center (TX).

       2. H.R. 2210 — Saving NASA’s Workforce Act (March 18, 2025)

        o  Sponsor: Rep. Zoe Lofgren [D‑CA‑18]
        o  Committee: House Science, Space & Technology
        o  Latest Action: Referred to committee
        o  Summary: Establishes a freeze on reduction-in-force (RIF)
           actions at NASA until FY 2026 appropriations are enacted.


       3. S. 1081 — Comprehensive NASA Reporting Act of 2025 (March 14,
       2025)

        o  Sponsors: Sen. Ted Cruz [R‑TX], Cosponsor: Sen. Tammy Duckworth
           [D‑IL]
        o  Committee: Senate Commerce, Science & Transportation
        o  Latest Action: Ordered to be favorably reported by the committee
           on April 30, 2025
        o  Summary: Directs the NASA Administrator to provide expanded
           reports to congressional oversight committees on agency
           activities.

       4. S. 933 — NASA Transition Authorization Act of 2025 (March 11,
       2025)

        o  Sponsors: Sen. Ted Cruz [R‑TX], Sen. Maria Cantwell [D‑WA], et
           al.
        o  Committee: Senate Commerce, Science & Transportation
        o  Latest Action: Introduced and referred to the committee on March
           11, 2025
        o  Summary: Reauthorizes NASA programs through FY 2025, extending
           provisions related to Artemis, SLS/Orion, and
           international/commercial partnerships.

       5. H.R. 1368 — DOE and NASA Interagency Research Coordination Act
       (February 14, 2025)

        o  Sponsor: Rep. Nick Begich [R‑AK]
        o  Committees: House Science, Space & Technology; Senate Commerce,
           Science & Transportation
        o  Latest Action: Passed House and referred to Senate committee on
           March 25, 2025
        o  Summary: Enables DOE–NASA collaboration via formal MOU for
           coordinated research, sharing infrastructure and data.

       6. H.R. 1626 — Edward J. Dwight, Jr., Congressional Gold Medal Act
       of 2025 (February 26, 2025)

        o  Sponsor: Rep. Joe Neguse [D‑CO‑2]
        o  Committee: House Financial Services
        o  Latest Action: Referred to committee
        o  Summary: Awards a Congressional Gold Medal to Edward J. Dwight,
           Jr., the first Black astronaut trainee, honoring his
           contributions.

       7. H.R. 477 — MACH Act (Modern Accelerated Computing & Hypersonics)
       (January 16, 2025)

        o  Sponsor: Rep. Vince Fong [R‑CA‑20]
        o  Committee: House Science, Space & Technology
        o  Latest Action: Referred to committee
        o  Summary: Supports R&D in hypersonic systems with potential
           applications to space transportation.

       8. H.R. 390 — ACERO Act (Advanced Computing & Engineering Research
       Opportunities) (January 14, 2025)

        o  Sponsor: Rep. Vince Fong [R‑CA‑20]
        o  Committee: House Science, Space & Technology
        o  Latest Action: Referred to committee
        o  Summary: Promotes advanced computing and engineering research
           relevant to NASA missions.

       9. H.R. 108 — Space Research Innovation Act (January 3, 2025)

        o  Sponsor: Rep. Andy Biggs [R‑AZ‑5]
        o  Committee: House Science, Space & Technology
        o  Latest Action: Referred to committee
        o  Summary: Directs NASA to establish a university-affiliated
           center that supports the analysis of cislunar and deep space
           missions.

=======================================================================


7/3/25: ArsTechnica.  Judge: You can’t ban DEI grants without
  bothering to define DEI / A written ruling details why a judge
  restored funding for many NIH grants.

In mid-June, a federal judge issued a stinging rebuke to the Trump
administration, declaring that its decision to cancel the funding for
many grants issued by the National Institutes of Health was illegal,
and suggesting that the policy was likely animated by racism. But the
detailed reasoning behind his decision wasn't released at the
time. The written portion of the decision was finally issued on
Wednesday, and it has a number of notable features.

... the court continues to find that the government's actions were
arbitrary and capricious, in part because the government never
bothered to define the problems that would get a grant canceled. As a
result, officials within the NIH simply canceled lists of grants they
received from DOGE without bothering to examine their scientific
merit, and then struggled to retroactively describe a policy that
justified the actions afterward—a process that led several of them to
resign.

...The grant cancellations, Young concludes, "Arise from the NIH’s
newly minted war against undefined concepts of diversity, equity, and
inclusion and gender identity, that has expanded to include vaccine
hesitancy, COVID, influencing public opinion and climate change." The
"undefined" aspect plays a key part in his reasoning. Referring to
DEI, he writes, "No one has ever defined it to this Court—and this
Court has asked multiple times." It's not defined in Trump's executive
order that launched the "newly minted war," and Young found that
administrators within the NIH issued multiple documents that attempted
to define it, not all of which were consistent with each other, and in
some cases seemed to use circular reasoning.

He also noted that the officials who sent these memos had a tendency
to resign shortly afterward, writing, "it is not lost on the Court
that oftentimes people vote with their feet."

As a result, the NIH staff had no solid guidance for determining
whether a given grant violated the new anti-DEI policy, or how that
might be weighed against the scientific merit of the grant. So, how
were they to identify which grants needed to be terminated? The
evidence revealed at trial indicates that they didn't need to make
those decisions; DOGE made them for the NIH. In one case, an NIH
official approved a list of grants to terminate received from DOGE
ONLY TWO MINUTES AFTER IT SHOWED UP IN HIS INBOX.

"There is no reasoned decision-making at all with respect to the NIH’s
'abruptness' in the 'robotic rollout' of this grant-termination
action," Young concludes. "Based upon a fair preponderance of the
evidence and on the sparse administrative record, the Court finds and
rules that HHS and, in turn, NIH, are being force-fed unworkable
'policy' supported with sparse pseudo-reasoning, and wholly
unsupported statements."

Young also noted that the termination of grants to Columbia University
was equally arbitrary. "How the scientific and research activities had
any connection with unrest issues on Columbia’s campus is
conspicuously never explained," Young noted. "The record evidence
certainly reveals none."

...Young also appears to lament the fact that he had to intervene
here, writing:

    "The American people have enjoyed a historical norm of a largely
    apolitical scientific research agency supporting research in an
    elegant, merit-based approach that benefits everyone. That
    historical norm changed on January 20, 2025. The new
    Administration began weaponizing what should not be weaponized—the
    health of all Americans through its abuse of HHS and the NIH
    systems, creating chaos and promoting an unreasonable and
    unreasoned agenda of blacklisting certain topics, that on this
    Administrative Record, has absolutely nothing to do with the
    promotion of science or research."


7/6/25: WP.  Bruce Partridge.  These scientific advances were ‘Made in
  the U.S.A.’ Will they continue?  / America has long led in
  research. Budget cuts could jeopardize that dominance.

    Bruce Partridge is emeritus professor of astronomy at Haverford
    College.

I’ve spent much of my long life studying — and trying to understand —
the history of the universe. Along the way, I have been constantly
reminded that science is essentially international: Science knows no
borders. The next great discovery could be made in Kansas or Kosovo or
Kyoto.

And yet, as an American patriot, I take pride that so much scientific
research bears the imprint**“Made in the U.S.A.” By so many measures,
this country — my country — has dominated all branches of the
scientific enterprise since World War II: the number of Nobel Prizes
in the sciences (nearly 300, with second-place Britain having about
one-third of that amount), the number of patents in the sciences (with
China rapidly catching up), the sheer number of Big Discoveries. We
Americans have walked on the moon and brought back chunks of it for
further study. We’ve whipped polio and fenced in HIV.

Consider just my small branch of science. I’m an astronomer, so here are
some of the things we’ve learned about our solar system and the cosmos
during the six decades of my scientific career:

  * We know the universe started years ago hot and dense, and we know
    its age — 13.8 billion years
    
    / A photo of the galaxy JADES-GS-z14-0, the farthest discovered yet.

     Most of the colored smudges in this infrared photo taken by the James
     Webb Space Telescope are galaxies, not stars. Each can contain billions
     of stars and planets./

     This is the most distant galaxy ever confirmed, as it looked 13.5
     billion years ago — just about 290 million years after the Big Bang.
     Galaxy JADES-GS-z14-0 

    Sources: NASA, ESA, CSA, Brant Robertson (UC Santa Cruz), Ben Johnson
    (CfA), Sandro Tacchella (Cambridge), Phill Cargile (CfA), Joris Witstok
    (Cambridge, University of Copenhagen), P. Jakobsen (University of
    Copenhagen), Alyssa Pagan (STScI), Mahdi Zamani (ESA/Webb), JADES
    Collaboration /

  * We know the Earth has been around for only one-third of that time
        — and how long it will be before the dying Sun engulfs the
        Earth. (Reassuringly, 4 billion to 5 billion years from now.)

  * We know ordinary matter — the stuff that makes up people and
    planets and stars — is only about 5 percent of the total mass in
    the universe.

  * We know what powers the stars, and that some stars end their lives
    in the blink of an eye by exploding spectacularly. Here’s one
    example: the Crab Nebula what remains of a star that exploded
    1,000 years ago, in an infrared photo taken by the James Webb
    Space Telescope.

      / The Crab Nebula, a supernova remnant located 6,500 light-years
        away in the constellation Taurus. (NASA/ESA/CSA/Tea
        Temim/Princeton University) /

  * We know black holes are real; some are dead stars and some, 1
    million or more times more massive, squat at the centers of
    galaxies, including our own Milky Way. The magenta spots in the
    image below show two black holes in the Topsy Turvy galaxy
    <https://www.nasa.gov/image-article/topsy-turvy-black-holes/>, about
    13 million light-years away from us.

       / The magenta spots in this image show two black holes.
       (NASA/JPL-Caltech/IRAP) /

  * We know neutron stars — stars so dense that a speck the size of a
    sesame seed would weigh more than a few thousand elephants — are
    common. The X-ray image below was made by NASA’s Chandra mission
    The numerous colorful dots are possible neutron stars or black
    holes located in a distant galaxy like our own.  [M83, Soria &
    Wu, 2003]

  * We know some of these neutron stars spin as fast as a car engine,
    with a regularity better than the best clocks we can manufacture.

  * We know how all the chemical elements are made: helium in the
    first few minutes of the long history of the universe; carbon in
    stars such as the Sun; and gold in stellar explosions or
    collisions of neutron stars.

  * Our robot ambassadors have trundled across the rust-red surface of
    Mars, and we’ve mapped its deep canyons and monstrous volcanoes. The
    image below shows a canyon in Mars that’s longer than the
    continental United States, known as Valles Marineris.

      / A mosaic of 102 images from the Viking
      Orbiter. (NASA/JPL-Caltech) /

  * Our American robots have visited every one of the planets of our
    solar system and many of its myriad moons.

     / An image of a volcano eruption in Io.  An ice volcano eruption
       on Io, a moon of Jupiter.  The volcanic plume is this photo
       from 1997 is mostly ice and extended about 60 miles into
       space. (NASA-JPL, DLR) /

  * And we’ve discovered thousands of planets revolving around other
    stars.

All this knowledge can be labeled “Made in the U.S.A.” All this is /our/
legacy, enabled by federal funding.

In just a few months, the Trump administration has undermined U.S.
dominance in science, built up over many decades. The federal funding
that made America the world’s science leader is threatened with
crippling reductions, not just for astronomy and space science but also
for fundamental research in energy, chemistry, computer science and
preventive medicine.

Consider, for example, the proposed budget for the National Science
Foundation, the federal agency that has funded many U.S. contributions
to astronomy (including mine), as well as research in physics,
chemistry and computer science. Last year, NSF supported more than
330,000 scientists, students and teachers; next year, the budget
allows for only 90,000 The funding rug will be pulled out from under
nearly a quarter of a million American scientists, engineers and
future scientists.

    [Doesn't mention that ~80% of grant proposals to NSF are REJECTED
    each year as it stands.]

Why?

Does science cost too much? I’ve been involved in some of the
discoveries listed above. The total cost to the average American
taxpayer for all of my research, from my first article in 1961 to now,
is less than a penny. The entire National Science Foundation budget for
all research in astronomy costs each American about $1 a year.

Is the scientific enterprise riddled with waste and fraud, as some in
Washington insistently allege? Some experiments don’t work — I’ve had
some duds. But we learn from our mistakes; failure is not always a
waste. And allegations of widespread fraud in the scientific enterprise
are not just entirely unproven; they make no sense. If I receive funds
from NASA, I have to account for them, and officials at both my college
and NASA review my accounts. Carefully.

If, instead, the gutting of science and so much else the federal
government does for us is just a whim, it is a costly one. Investments
in basic research have been one of the most cost-effective
expenditures of government money in my lifetime. It is not just the
faster computer chips, the better weather forecasts, the cheaper
batteries and the more potent vaccines American science has
pioneered. Scientists at colleges and universities across the country
have trained the scientists and engineers who go on to found companies
that now employ millions.

In the last letter he wrote, Thomas Jefferson pointed to the value of
“the light of science.”  Whatever the reasons are — real or proffered
— for dimming this light, we risk surrendering leadership in an
enterprise of proven value to our health, prosperity and sense of
wonder at the marvels of the natural world.
 
Comments...

US technology and research also invented solar cells and solar energy,
then Republicans kowtowed to oil industry executives and their
lobbying money and handed a profitable manufacturing industry to
China. With Trump’s cuts to all scientific and medical research, fully
supported by the Republican Party, the US will no longer be in the
forefront of innovation or advanced medical treatments. China and
Europe will benefit as the economic advantages move with the
scientists whose work will be funded by other countries instead of the
US. Even with full funding eventually under a Democratic president, it
could takes decades to regain the preeminence the US has long
maintained.

   I'm afraid that it is most likely that US dominance will be lost
   forever. Even under pre-Trump funding levels, other countrie,
   mainly China were outsperating us. China is on the way to being the
   leader in renewable energy. and BEVs, and thanks to the
   shortsidedness of the current administration, the lead in these
   fields has been ceded to China. Once lost, it will be nearly
   impossible to regain it. Worse, many of our top scientists and
   engineers are reading the writing on the wall, and are looking to
   leave the US for other countries where their research has a better
   chance of being funded. Once gone, it is unlikely they will come
   back.

You really do have to wonder how MAGA defines "Great". They are making
America less of a leader in many areas including science, which
certainly does not align with my definition of great nation.

     ‘Great’ in the percentage of obese people
     ‘Great’ in stupidity and ignorance
     ‘Great’ in idol worshipping a certain orange person
     ‘Great’ in Dunning - Kruger 

And all to provide the ultra rich with a tax benefit that most won’t
even notice. Most Americans are ignorant regarding the reason
government funds scientific research. Most initial research is high
risk. No private enterprise or even foundation is willing to invest in
research that is more likely to be a “dud.” This is where government
steps in. Fund that initial research and then when an idea actually
shows some promise, private enterprise and foundations can step in to
further develop and scale the idea. This is how and why the US is
number one in technology. This is why we are so successful
globally. Failure to fund creates a vacuum for other countries like
China, countries in Europe to fill. Just look at how many tech
unicorns the US has produced versus the rest of the world. And look at
how many of those companies have an immigrant entrepreneur (or more)
at its core. This anti-science, no government funding philosophy will
set the US back for generations.

    [Don't forget we're also investing in building a police state with
    an all-American Gulag.]

The loss of funding will result in more than lost research. We are
losing our researchers. Other countries are recruiting our scientists.
When we get the funding back (go Democrats!!), we'll still have lost a
large part of a generation

You forgot something: "We elect dangerous idiots twice"

     Twice recently. G.W. Bush wasn't exactly an intellectual giant either.

"Will they continue?"  The question is answered; NO - our leadership
in science -- is over. Already, crucial funding for healthcare
research - including cancer and alzheimer's research, space science,
climate research - has been collapsed. NASA is being forced to abandon
planetary science programs even - that have recently been initiated.
Because science relies on evidence, critical thinking and proof - it's
the seething enemy of a Rightist politics which relies on populations
steeped in lies, hate and superstition. 

   [cont] This also accounts for Rightist antipathy towards education
   and the educated; something that in the modern era began with the
   vile Ronald Reagan who, as governor of CA, eviscerated that state's
   proud university system. He continued that "work" as president -
   collapsing the national education budget by 50% - dealing a blow to
   education at all levels while sparking the explosion in university
   tuitions that continues to this day. 

   [cont] To understand the effects of Reagan's vandalism, consider -
   in 1980, America's students rank #1 in math and science - globally.
   But the war against science and education is also why Trump is
   stealing healthcare from 20 million Americans; a heartless act that
   will lead annually to around 120,000 deaths every year; deaths
   that, with health care, would have been prevented.  it's all for
   the enrichment of Oligarchy.  If this is hard to understand, think
   of it this way; When Alaric's Visigoth horde, on August 24, 410 AD,
   breached the Roman gates for the final time, it flooded the streets
   of that city raping and pillaging and murdering without a care. Its
   mission was simple; to carry away anything and everything of
   value. That people died in the process was meaningless.  THIS is
   the historical context which sheds the most light on the barbarian
   horde to which we ceded our society on November 5.

     Don't be ridiculous. We are spending at record levels on research
     and development, approaching a trillion per year.

        Total proposed funding for basic research in 2024 (BEFORE
        Trump) including NIH, DOE, NSF, NASA, USGS, NOAA, NIST, USDA,
        EPA was $56 billion which is about 20 times SMALLER than your
        ridiculous claim! See:
        https://www.science.org/content/article/final-u-s-spending-bills-offer-gloomy-outlook-science
        The existing and proposed cuts will destroy NIH, NSF, DOE,
        NASA, EPA, and University scientific research, leading to a
        complete loss of scientists, jobs, the pipeline for training
        scientists, to other countries and a total loss of American
        pre-eminence in science and technology.

“We sneer at experts,” observed David DeWitt. “We spit epithets like
‘academic elites’ at professors dedicating their lives to pursuing
discovery that benefits humankind. And we worship flashy internet
hucksters selling lifestyle scams.  “We mock intelligence and glorify
egomania and materialism. We worship spectacle and are voyeurs for
anger, confrontation, and violence. We live in fantasy worlds where
what we want to believe is true regardless of whether it is true,
because what we want comes first no matter what, certainly no matter
any facts, this decadence of mind and body only afforded to us by
modernity’s remarkable luxury and technology.”  “It is in these ways
that I regard a very great many adults as simply overgrown children.”

     Spot-on. I grew up in the late 60s and early 70s. There was no
     "bro-culture" back then. We are overrun by a verminous generation
     of "men-children." They have lead America into the gauzy valley
     of stupidity and knownothingism.

Who needs scientific knowledge and facts when all the knowledge needed
can be found in the Bible, ignoramuses "doing their own research" and
the genius of the 47th President and first dictator of the United
States.  The Earth is flat and 5000 year-old, horse dewormer cures
COVID, and one can change the course of a tropical storm using a magic
sharpie.

    Six thousand years old. Get your facts straight. Construction
    started on a Sunday, and was completed the following Friday.

Trump has basically surrendered the 21st century to China.
He didn't even put up a fight. Just a small whimper.

[Lamont_Cranston] If you ask a MAGA cult member when was the USA
‘great’, they would likely come up with some period in the middle of
the last century, say 1940 - 1970.  And why was that?  The USA won the
Second World War, built the interstate highway system, and landed a
man on the moon.  Every single one was a government program.  Every
single one of those programs were funded by income tax rates as high
as 90%.

    Don't forget the GI Bill which paid for the higher educaion of
    returning WWII military. Between about 1945 and 1965 every
    university and college had Married Students' Housing where older
    ex-military students eked out a limited budget while earning
    advanced degrees. I read somewhere that GI Bill changed US culture
    and economy, built entire suburbs and highway systems, schools,
    shopping malls.

    I knew a wealthy Santa Barbara lawyer who credits the GI bill for
    taking him from the working class in the North East to a
    multimillion dollar house, a 50 foot yacht, etc.

Trump is costing us everything that has made us great. 

Greetings to Professor Partridge, who taught me physics many years ago
when I was a student at Bryn Mawr college. I still remember his
passion for the subject, of which this beautifully written article is
a good example. I went on to a career in medicine, and have recently
taken up astronomy as a hobby ( in part to get my mind off
politics). Like Dr. Partridge, I am devastated by the deliberate and
extremely short sighted destruction of American science. I am truly
puzzled as to why politicians would be against advances in science and
medicine. Perhaps it is contempt for people who are smarter than they
are. In any case enormous harm is being done to future generations.,

I've read about the downfall of civilizations and wondered how it
happened and why they didn't do something to prevent it. Am now
looking at it from the inside.

The Trump administration isn't dimming the light of science; they're
extinguishing it.

The damage to America's scientific research enterprise has already
been done. DOGE has crippled science and the new Republican budget
will finish it off. This isn't something that could happen. It has
already happened.

Trump is running on Stalin’s timeline—controlling what we see, what we
know, what we remember. This is not metaphor. This is a warning.  And
it’s not just democracy and truth that are at stake. If the
U.S. surrenders its scientific and technological edge, it will forfeit
a massive economic advantage—one that has driven American exports and
global influence for decades. Instead of investing in next-generation
industries, Trump seems fixated on reviving outdated steel mills and
obsolete gas-guzzling cars. It’s not just backwards—it’s delusional.
In a world racing toward the future, he’s slamming the brakes and
throwing the map out the window.  A small reminder from a Swede

It is now rapidly dominating in ignorance. America was once a proud
crucible of knowledge, leading the world in so many areas and highly
respected for it. Now the world is shaking its head at the decline and
sheer incompetence. Stunning!

I got my PhD in physics with Pell Grants and NSF grants. Under Trump
those will vanish. I'm now retired, but I know many faculty at
universities who are wondering how long education will last. I know
they'll try as hard as they can to help students.

The magazine Nature ranked universities worldwide: Harvard is number
one, MIT number 10. All universities in between, 2 to 9 are
Chinese. The number of scientific papers published used to come im
majority from US universities. It now comes from Chinese
universities. The number of patents must show the same trend. It is
predicted to accelerate in the future. And what is the Whitehouse
doing to science? Destroying our scientific dominance. "US Uber
alles!" Ah! Ah! Ah! Tragic. It does not have to be that way.

[henrystar] You talk science, but you show men on the Moon, which is NOT
science. Here's what science actually IS:
https://henry.pha.jhu.edu/rch.html  [Dick Henry's elaborate webpage]

[BigBill4]The National Science Foundation plays an outsized roll in funding the
education of graduate students in science and engineering. At this
moment, the NSF supports about 0.8 million graduate students to learn
and do research. Some of these students go on to do great basic
research, as described in this article. More apply their graduate
education in industry where they start companies or invent the next
cutting edge devices. Some graduate students go directly to work in
the national labs, where they do top secret work to defend our nation.

   [cont] The U.S. is in a race with China to produce the scientists
   and engineers that make this progress and China has ramped up its
   Universities so that it is currently producing twice as many
   Ph.D. and masters level engineers and scientists as does the
   U.S. Now the Trump administration will be cutting the numbers of
   supported graduate students by a factor of two. After these new
   cuts, China will be producing 3-4 times as many Ph.D. and masters
   level scientists and engineers per year as does the U.S. The Trump
   administration has stated that the cuts are a refocusing of
   research on national needs and suggest that these cuts do no
   harm. That statement is incorrect because most graduate students
   work in different areas after graduating than they pursue in
   graduate school. The total number of graduate engineers and
   scientists is the important number to focus upon and the Trump
   administration cuts will reduce the total number of NSF supported
   grads by about a factor of two It this is not corrected, China
   could be producing 3 - 4 times the numbers of Ph.D. and Masters
   level scientists and engineers as will the U.S.. Since about 3
   percent of current Ph.D. level scientists and engineers in the
   U.S. workforce retire every year, the failure to educate will have
   an immediate effect on the nation. Axing NSF support hurts the
   U.S. in both the short and long term in ways that will be very
   hard, if not impossible, to correct.

So the UK had only a third the number of Nobel prize winners as the
US? Population UK: 69.55 million. Population USA: 347,275
million. Might explain a bit? The US is always right at the top for
boasting anyway.

The problem with de-funding the sciences is that scientists have to
put food on the table for their families. When you take away their
funding, you can't expect them to do brilliant things for free, while
they and their families starve and live on the streets. It very
quickly becomes necessary to find work outside of the sciences in
order to survive. Teaching salaries only go so far, especially when
your university is being de-funded.  Once those scientists land
stable, well-paying jobs outside of the sciences, they are lost to the
sciences forever. That is because the half-life of the sciences, at
least in my field, is about 5 years. Beyond that time frame, it's
extremely difficult to catch up with developments in the field and be
competitive with younger PhDs hunting for their first
appointments. You're essentially washed up.  Moreover, when the US
loses its scientists, it loses the human infrastructure that trains
and grooms future scientists. This is why even when MAGA is but a
fading memory, we will struggle ever to lead again in the sciences. It
will take a generation or two just to repair the damage this
administration is inflicting on us.

How exactly does this liberal astronomy stuff relate to building golf
resorts? Enquiring minds want to know. /s

I am a microbiologist and am currently at a conference. There have
been multiple talks so far by researchers who work on ways to combat
antibiotic resistance who have ended by saying that their projects
have the potential to save untold numbers of lives, but that the
grants supporting them have been terminated. Trump is killing people
while cutting America’s throat.

Under DJT, we will lead the world in cryptocurrency, memes, and energy
consumption. Think of the benefits to mankind.

So this is how we Make America Great Again? We do so by shutting down
the only business that has kept us leading the world. Brilliant, my
behind!!!

The worst part of the Trump administration is that the damage they do
won't be felt immediately, but long after he's left office. Then the
current president will get the blame. Just as Trump is getting the
credit for the Biden economy today. Biden's major pieces of
legislation have fully kicked in and jobs are being created because of
it. Some of the worst of Trump's policies are set to start after the
2026 election, so voters don't know what they've done to them.

The MAGA movement represents the willful dumbing down of
America. Anti-science, anti-vaccine, etc. Close-minded, frightened
conservatives are trying to turn back the hands of time. They fear
change. They fear progress. They are unsophisticated and
under-educated. And their numbers are growing. The U.S. has indeed
accomplished many great things, as this article points out, but we're
collectively getting dumber by the day. I'm embarrassed by it
all. Most of the western world now see us a wealthy and powerful
country that's rapidly becoming a backwater, not to be trusted.

This is what happens when you elect people who have no knowledge or
understanding of how the modern world developed. The fruits of basic
scientific research have utterly transformed our lives from our
grandparents’ times and the US has been the leading nation in this,
showing how crass these cuts are.  Britain , who with a quarter of
your population has a higher proportion of Nobel science laureates per
head of population than the US, has always been less successful than
the US in converting those scientific advances into commercial
enterprises. Your combination of scientific excellence and commercial
expertise is a world beater and if you lose the former, you are just
cutting off your nose to spite your face.

...read this outlining all the current research and development status
    due to TACO cuts and dismantling of agencies:
    https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.com/p/july-6-2025 
    A succinct, truthful summary of just where we are today and the
    trouble we are in.

This is not a whim. It is the Republican War On Science being fed
steroids, backed by the unaccountable power of our Unitary Executive
and his Congressional psychophants. Remember that Morons Are Governing
America, and they can't stand any truths that contradict the lies and
panders they offer to the Deplorables who keep them in office. Science
relies on empirical facts and deductive rigor, neither of which can be
made to go away by simply lying more and yelling louder, the only
rhetorical skills these cretins possess. I fear we're going to have to
witness a lot more Natural Selection like we're seeing this week in
Texas before we have a ghost of a chance of getting a solid majority
of Americans to once again believe in objective reality and truth.

I have long known that my taxpayer contributions to science are next
to nothing; less than a milkshake at a roadside diner. I have alway
supported our government's spending in this area. I too am very proud
of what the U.S. has contributed to human knowledge - in all areas. I
traveled the world with the Navy and continued to do so as a travel
agent. I was always a little surprised, and gratified, at the respect
and admiration for our country in almost every country I visited. I
don't know what course to take to reverse this idiocy. We have a dunce
for president evidenced by his personal ire toward higher education. I
know he went to business school, but very little about how well he did
or if he finished. At least one professor said he was the stupidest
student he ever had. It's the Duning-Kruger effect on steroids as he
believes he's a genius. His brand of genius will destroy us. We need
to get out the vote at mid-term. If the GOP suffers greatly perhaps he
will lose most of his support. I have no other hope.

    
   xFrom rwo@virginia.edu Thu Jul 10 12:09:50 2025
   xDate: Thu, 10 Jul 2025 12:09:47
   xFrom: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
   xTo: "bpartrid@haverford.edu" <bpartrid@haverford.edu>
   xCc: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
   xSubject: Terrific!

      Hi Bruce: Terrific article!  I hope the right people read it
      and take it to heart.

      Lately I catch myself thinking, "Well, at least astronomy
      will thrive in Europe and Asia."  Incredibly sad.

           Best,
              Bob

   xFrom bpartrid@haverford.edu Thu Jul 10 12:45:28 2025
   xDate: Thu, 10 Jul 2025 12:45:12
   xFrom: Bruce Partridge <bpartrid@haverford.edu>
   xTo: "O'Connell, Robert W (rwo)" <rwo@virginia.edu>
   xSubject: Re: Terrific!

      Thanks, Bob.  I'm certain the op-ed is high on Trump's reading
      list....  Bruce


==================================================================

7/8/25:  From RWO...

SENT 7/8/25 TO:

         Sen Kaine, VA
         Sen Warner, VA
         Sen Tillis, NC
         Sen Budd, NC 

email: rwo.conne@gmail.com

Subject:  Restore support for basic scientific research 

----------------------------

The Senate should be working as hard as possible to restore federal
funding for basic scientific research that the Trump administration
has proposed to cut.  The proposed cuts threaten the entire scientific
ecosystem in the country.

For a moment, set aside the inevitable long-term crippling of
America's scientific and technological prowess and look at the
short-term economic impact.

Implementing this budget would lead to a financial depression for the
scientific workforce -- not just for the scientists themselves but for
hundreds of thousands of support staff and contractors and the tens of
thousands of businesses that supply them.  People can easily visualize
the sophisticated equipment needed by modern science in the case of
the space program.  But biology and clinical research laboratories
depend just as much on high-tech infrastructure in the form of
advanced electronics, computational power, precision devices, special
materials, and other indispensable elements.

How many people would lose their jobs?  Since all the money allocated
by the federal government is ultimately spent on people's salaries,
it's easy to make a rough estimate.  The proposed cuts to the major
science agencies amount to about $35 billion.  Since each federal
dollar spent directly on science generates something like an
additional two dollars of related economic activity in the country,
the total loss to the economy would be about $100 billion.  Taking a
round figure for the salary of an average worker in the US scientific
ecosystem of $80,000, that implies an equivalent loss of over one million
jobs.  
 
This will arrive as a sudden calamity, not a gradual transition that
might allow the system to readjust over time.  The US deliberately
adopted a special structure 75 years ago in which basic research is
mainly supported by the government but applied research is mainly
supported by the private sector.  As a result, alternative employment
in the private sector will not be available for many of the affected
people, perhaps for years.  Many will lose their livelihoods, their
financial security, their homes.  Collateral damage to local housing
markets and essential services like health care will be serious.  The
effects will be centered on communities hosting research universities
or other major research centers all over the country, in red and blue
states alike.  Phoenix, Houston, Cleveland, Nashville, Miami, and the
Research Triangle in North Carolina are good examples of places often
overlooked by those who imagine scientific research is concentrated in
blue states.

How can anyone think this is good for America? 

======================================================================


7/8/25:  Facebook/Astronomers.  From Elizabeth Mills.  

In case folks have missed this: the state of Indiana is about to
discontinue more than 400 "low enrollment" university degrees at their
campuses. The IU Astrophysics PhD is among them (to be
"merged/consolidated", presumably with Physics, by AY 26-27). 

Among other discontinuations ("voluntarily" submitted by the
universities in response to state legislation) are physics and
math/science degrees at the smaller satellite campuses.  These moves
should also be seen in context with program reviews and cuts that have
been happening for several years now in multiple states (West
Virginia, North Carolina, and Kansas, all of which involved work with
consulting firm rpk group). 

These are having increasing impacts on science degrees and departments
(though of course arts and humanities remain major targets).  You can
find the full list of Indiana program discontinuations here:
https://www.in.gov/.../Info-Item-Voluntary-Early-Actions...  West
Virginia cuts from 2023 (including math PhD):
https://mountainstatespotlight.org/.../wvu-board-cuts.../ UNC
Greensboro cuts from 2024 (including physics BA/BS):
https://www.wunc.org/.../unc-greensboro-announces-program...  Kansas
programs still under review as "underperforming" (including physics
degrees at almost all Kansas universities and KU's Astro BA/BS)
https://lawrencekstimes.com/.../kbor-evaluating-action.../

FYI- the Astrophysics PhD is a small part of the graduate program (the
main degree is still the Astronomy PhD, which should remain). But the
overall effect on IU as a whole and the availability of physics
undergrad degrees to a wide population of students across Indiana
campuses will be devastating. The loss of education degrees
(particularly the wonderful Physics B.S. Ed at IU which helped train
future teachers) is also extremely disheartening.

Comments...

You can sadly add Ohio to that list, the cuts haven’t yet gotten
through the system.


7/9/25; ArsTechnica.  What the Duffy?  Here's why Trump appointed the
secretary of transportation to lead NASA "Honored to accept this
mission. Time to take over space. Let's launch."

Six weeks after he terminated the nomination of Jared Isaacman to become
NASA administrator, President Trump moved on Wednesday evening to
install a new temporary leader for the space agency.

The newly named interim administrator, Sean Duffy, already has a full
portfolio: He is serving as the secretary of transportation, a
Cabinet-level position that oversees 55,000 employees across 13
agencies, including the Federal Aviation Administration.

"Sean is doing a TREMENDOUS job in handling our Country's Transportation
Affairs, including creating a state-of-the-art Air Traffic Control
systems, while at the same time rebuilding our roads and bridges, making
them efficient, and beautiful, again," Trump wrote on his social media
network Wednesday evening. "He will be a fantastic leader of the ever
more important Space Agency, even if only for a short period of time."

In response to this post, Duffy wrote on X , "Honored to accept this
mission. Time to take over space. Let's launch."

The idea of the secretary of transportation also running NASA may seem
like an odd choice, but in some ways, the appointment of Duffy makes
sense for the president. Whether it is beneficial to the space agency
remains to be seen, but two industry sources speaking confidentially
said they would not immediately dismiss the prospect.

    Who is Sean Duffy?

Duffy has a colorful background, starring in the /Real World: Boston/
reality television show in 1997 and serving as a commentator on ESPN. A
Republican, he served in the US House of Representatives from 2011 to
2019. He is married and has nine children.

Although he does not have a space background, Duffy has shown an
interest in spaceflight since becoming FAA administrator. He watched
from NASA Headquarters the Crew 9 mission's splashdown on March 18,
which brought Butch Wilmore and Suni Williams back to Earth after a
prolonged stay in space. He also had expressed an interest in attending
the forthcoming Crew 11 launch at the end of this month.

Officials at NASA were CAUGHT UNAWARE by the announcement on Wednesday
evening. They had been expecting the existing acting administrator,
Janet Petro, to remain in place at least through the end of the year
while a new nominee was put forth to lead NASA and confirmed by Congress.

Sources indicated that although Petro did not have a particularly high
standing within the Trump administration, she did nothing to be removed
from her position. Rather, it seems that Trump wanted someone he liked
and trusted running NASA. This is probably a benefit for the agency, as
it will give NASA a direct line to the president. For example, Duffy can
text Trump if NASA needs something or is being treated unfairly during
the budgeting process.

Petro did not have that kind of political sway, and this is a White
House in which access to the president matters a great deal. The agency
was in great peril, as there was no one in headquarters who could push
back on harmful things being done to NASA or get things done. Duffy will
have that kind of pull. But he will also be incredibly busy already with
the Department of Transportation.

    Duffy will push for the president's budget

There are also some reasons to be concerned about NASA under Duffy.
Because he does not come from a space background, but rather a
political one, Duffy likely views his mission at NASA as carrying out
the vision of the space agency established by the president's budget
request, which slashes funding for science and makes significant
changes to NASA's deep space exploration plans.

His appointment comes on the eve of the US Senate revealing its response
to the president's budget request, a markup of the federal budget for
fiscal year 2026. The Senate is likely to restore many of the cuts
proposed by the White House Office of Management and Budget, which is
led by Russ Vought. In terms of alignment, Duffy is likely to side with
Vought and push for the president's budget to be implemented at the
start of the fiscal year on October 1.

Philosophically, Vought believes strongly that the president should have
more authority to direct federal spending. And he probably will force
the issue this year. Using tactics such as recission --essentially
ordering federal agencies to freeze spending -- and impoundment, Vought
could seek to implement the priorities in the president's budget
request, which his office wrote. In this, Duffy will offer a more
capable political ally at NASA.

So buckle up. NASA finally has some clarity on who will lead the
agency over the next several months, and it is a person trusted by the
president. Duffy is also viewed as a capable leader and experienced
politician who understands how Washington, DC, works. It's possible
that Duffy will listen to the concerns of leaders at NASA in the
coming weeks and seek to offset some of the more Draconian (and
difficult to understand) cuts by Vought's office.

However, it is also possible that he takes his mandate to slash NASA's
budget and workforce seriously, and in doing so would be vastly more
effective than Petro.

260 Comments...

Is Ars joined those bending the knee to the first felon? For shame. 

   [Berger]: Just reporting what I hear from my space policy sources,
   who are across the board in terms of their politics.
 
I very much enjoyed The Guardian's take on his appointment, which
ended with the wonderful paragraph: "Duffy has no scientific
background, but does have experience with transportation, as a former
contestant on the MTV reality TV game show Road Rules, a Winnnebago
driving contest."

Eric roughly what percentage of insiders think the the next 20 years
of space look like 1975 to 1995 and not the dawn of a new space age?
Because in my darkest moments I definitely think space exploration may
have peaked for at least a generation or more. I'm 41 and I worry I'm
more likely to be dead and buried before we get boots on Mars or that
the last Apollo astronaut will be dead before we get back to the Moon.
I don't know what you're seeing out there but I see space as being at
the absolute bottom of the priority barrel with almost all of the real
life people I know, in the news and on social media, with the left and
the right - there just doesn't seem to be any real constituency for
space anymore. Elon has the entire left hoping for starships to blow
up on launch pads and the right thinks science in general is
inherently out to get them - I really have trouble seeing the light in
the space tunnel these days.

...to keep things in perspective, defunding NASA is bad. Crippling the
NSF and NIH is doubleplusungood.

The Senate Subcommittee on CJS released the audio of their meeting
today: $33.9 billion for science agencies, which means NASA and
NSF. That's roughly flat funding levels for both agencies.  Full
appropriations committee meets tomorrow so there will likely be more
information, but for now it doesn't look like the Senate wants to cut
NASA.
 
Duffy is there to be a hatchet man for the over 2,000 job cuts at
NASA. There is no deeper purpose. With Isaacman gone, there is no one
within the admin to actually fight for NASA. It'll be up to the
Senate. I don't have much hope.
https://www.politico.com/news/2025/07/09/nasa-staff-departures-00444674

In normal times it would definitely be seen as a bad thing. Under
Trump, we feel relieved if the acting head of NASA isn't a Flat
Earther or Moon Landing Denier.

    Well, Duffy is a climate change denier. Quoting him: " If you say
    the climate's changing, is it coming from CO2 or is it coming from
    the sun? Where is  why is the climate changing? And then you
    would say, let's have a rigorous debate about what is causing it,
    or what are all the factors that bring us to climate change? And
    when you have the left that says "we're gonna shut down
    alternative science or science that challenges our narrative," I
    think it makes people go "maybe there is a different set of
    priorities here as opposed to climate change, maybe it actually is
    an agenda of control." -- So he supports "alternative science",
    whatever that is. Perhaps not a flat earther, but not necessarily
    much better.

Duffy has enough to deal with at DOT. Let's give him another job and
hope he doesn't do both of them poorly because...Trump feels
comfortable with him? NASA's about to lose 2,145 senior people. And
now it has a temporary administrator who has no space expertise and is
moonlighting from his main job overseeing a budget of $106 billion?

[Congressman] John Culberson, a fierce advocate for space above any
parochial considerations who lost his job in 2018, I think in no small
part due to redistricting. He funneled money for Europa Clipper and
campaigned hard for JPL to add even a lander to the mission. A true
loss for space as far as I'm concerned.

I grew up in Boston.  Sean Duffy is just about as dumbfuck-batshit as
you could get, in Boston.  His existence offends me.
 
1) How long is "interim"?
2) Who will be picked for the permanent position?

   [Berger] Yeah, great questions. Interim could be six months of 18
   months. I'm not sure. As for who will be picked, they were still
   doing preliminary discussions with people as of last week, so I
   think it may be awhile before they select and name a permanent
   nominee.

I'm not expecting a guy who couldn't correctly assess the risks of
taking public transportation to the office to be able to correctly
assess the risks of space travel.

destroying NASA won't be easy to undo. These programs can't be stopped
and started on a whim; it takes time and steady support. Once the
satellites and probes are turned off, many of them will be done, dead,
and gone forever.
 
The man too afraid to ride the NYC subway during rush hour is gonna
lead us to the moon and beyond? God help us all.


7/10/25: Guardian.  Trump names Sean Duffy as interim Nasa head after
   rejecting Elon Musk ally / Transportation secretary named as interim
   administrator of space agency as it faces crisis amid
   Trump's budget cuts

...Isaacman, who has flown multiple missions with Musk's SpaceX, was
widely viewed as Musk's pick to lead Nasa. But Trump withdrew that
nomination in May, posting earlier this week that he was "surprised to
learn" Isaacman was a blue blooded Democrat, who had never contributed
to a Republican before.

The reversal follows an escalating beef between Trump and Musk and
their respective camps, including a reportedly heated dust-up between
Musk and Duffy at a White House meeting over cuts to FAA programs that
support commercial spaceflight.

The appointment comes as Nasa faces an existential crisis. The agency
is hemorrhaging scientific talent amid Trump's proposed budget cuts
that would slash the space science program from $7.33bn to $3.9bn
annually. Under that proposal, Nasa's total budget would fall from
$24.8bn to $18.8bn.  About 900 Nasa employees departed in February,
with another 1,500 signing up for voluntary separation programs
through July, according to documents obtained by Politico. The exodus
has prompted protests outside Nasa headquarters, with contractors and
staff holding signs reading "Save Nasa" last week.

The Arizona senator and former astronaut Mark Kelly rhetorically asked
what would have happened if this sort of mass departure happened
during the cold war in the mid-20th century. "We would've lost the
space race to the Soviets," he answered himself. "And now we risk
losing the next space race to China."

Seven former Nasa science chiefs have also written to Congress,
agreeing that the cuts would hand China an advantage in space
exploration.  "If the administration is committed to countering the
growing Chinese capability in space, the US needs to continue its
investment in US space science, not cede it unilaterally," they wrote.

Duffy, a former Republican congressman from Wisconsin who starred on
MTV's The Real World in 1997, brings no space background to the
role. His appointment is seen as a signal that Trump intends to push
through his controversial budget cuts, which would terminate dozens of
science missions including the Mars Odyssey spacecraft that has been
studying the red planet since 2001.

"While Nasa's science missions have greatly expanded humanity's
understanding of the Earth, solar system, and universe, the current
expenditure of over $7bn per year on over 100 missions is
unsustainable," the administration's May budget request reads.

Since taking office as transportation secretary in January, Duffy has
focused on rolling back what he calls "woke DEI policies" and
Biden-era environmental regulations. His dual role overseeing both
transportation and Nasa --  agencies with combined budgets exceeding
$30bn -- tracks with Trump's thinking on mixing assignments, notably
Marco Rubio as secretary of state and acting national security
adviser.

Janet Petro, director of Kennedy Space Center, had been serving as
acting administrator since Trump's inauguration in January.


7/11/25:  Van Scoyoc newsletter

Over 2,000 senior staff set to leave NASA under agency push.

 At least 2,145 senior-ranking NASA employees are set to leave under a
push to shed staff, according to documents obtained by POLITICO \364
potentially spelling trouble for White House space policy and
depriving the agency of decades of experience. The 2,145 employees are
those in GS-13 to GS-15 positions \364 senior-level government ranks
that are typically reserved for those with specialized skills or
management responsibilities. The losses are spread across each of
NASA\371s 10 regional centers. Read more:\240 Politico
[vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]

Congress passes budget reconciliation bill with $10 billion for NASA

Congress approved a budget reconciliation bill that includes nearly
$10 billion for NASA human spaceflight programs and could also lead to
the transfer of a space shuttle to Houston. Of that funding, $4.1
billion would go to procure two additional Space Launch System rockets
for Artemis 4 and 5, after the administration\371s fiscal year 2026
budget request for NASA proposed canceling SLS after Artemis 3. An
additional $2.6 billion would go to complete the lunar Gateway, which
had also been slated for cancellation in the budget proposal.  Read
more:\240 Space News [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]

Senators push back on Trump's proposal to cut NASA science funding by 47%

 On Thursday, the U.S. Senate appropriations committee voted on a bill
that provides NASA's science programs with $7.3 billion for the
upcoming fiscal year. The bill would reject the Trump administration's
budget proposal for the agency, which slashes such funding by 47%. The
bipartisan Senate bill \364 worked on by Jerry Moran (R-KS) and Chris
Van Hollen (D-MD) \364 initially won by a vote of 15-14. However,
primarily due to contention surrounding the location of the FBI
headquarters, the bill was ultimately withdrawn, and another vote will
be conducted during a future meeting. "The bill funds NASA at $24.9
billion, slightly above [fiscal year 2025 levels] to explore the solar
system, to advance our understanding of climate change, promote
innovation and sustainability in aeronautics," Sen. Van Hollen said
during Thursday's committee meeting. "We rejected cuts that would have
devastated NASA's science by 47% and would have terminated 55
operating and planned missions." Read more:\240 Space.com
[vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]


7/11/25:  World Socialist Web Site (<https://www.wsws.org/en>)
   Dan Weedman on Trump Cuts to Science Budget

The passage of President Donald Trump’s “One Big Beautiful Bill Act” on
July 4, 2025 was the death knell for basic scientific research in the
United States. As part of the largest redistribution of wealth from the
working class to the rich in the country’s history, through a permanent
$3.8 trillion tax cut, the bill has also zeroed out critical funding for
ongoing research at NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF).

A recent article by the American Astronomical Society warned, “this
budget poses an existential threat to our disciplines,” including
planetary science, astrophysics, heliophysics (the study of the Sun),
particle physics and mathematics, as well as a slew of educational
outreach programs run by both agencies.

The cuts to every aspect of scientific research are also mirrored in the
complete dismantling of public health programs during the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the dismantling of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of Health as agencies
of public health and medical research. Among the sharpest expressions of
this process is the inability of doctors and researchers to get adequate
funding for studies into Long COVID, an array of often debilitating
symptoms suffered by hundreds of millions worldwide as the result of
contracting one or more coronavirus infections.

The /World Socialist Web Site/ recently spoke to former NASA
administrator Dan Weedman, 82, about the far-reaching and devastating
impacts the cuts in the budget will have on science in the United States.

*WSWS:* How long have you been involved in astronomical research?

*Dan Weedman:* My career has spanned 60 years. I worked at either NASA
or NSF from 1992 until 2002, serving as the head of NASA Astrophysics
from 1993 to 1995 and as NSF program director for the National Optical
Astronomy Observatories and the National Solar Observatory from August
1999 until September 2002.

That time includes a lot of critical moments in astronomy, including the
first servicing mission for the Hubble Space Telescope in 1993 and the
planning, development and launch of several missions, including the
Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, now known as Chandra, and the
Space Infrared Telescope Facility, which got renamed to Spitzer.

I retired from NSF to join the research team on Spitzer, which launched
in August 2003. I worked there for a decade and a half before the funds
for research were zeroed out, and then ultimately the spacecraft was
decommissioned in 2020.

Over that time period, you can compare the budgets quantitatively. My
annual budget in 1995 was about $750 million. The budget for
astrophysics for 2026 was cut by /66 percent/, to only $520 million.
That’s not adjusted for inflation.

At the time we had real money and all sorts of plans. Now the only
things that are going to be funded enough to function are the JWST
[James Webb Space Telescope] and Hubble. It’s going to be devastating.

An image of Pluto captured by New Horizons during its flyby of the
distant dwarf planet. Among the most striking feature on Pluto is the
bright expanse of Pluto's icy, nitrogen-and-methane rich "heart,"
Sputnik Planitia. [Photo: NASA/Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics
Laboratory/Southwest Research Institute/Alex Parker]

*WSWS:* The budget for NASA as a whole is being gutted from $24.9
billion to $18.8 billion, a reduction of 24 percent. The Science Mission
Directorate is getting slashed by 47 percent, nearly half, planetary
science by 32 percent and heliophysics by 46 percent. An article from
the Planetary Society wrote that 19 missions are being axed. Can any
science be done under these conditions?

*DW:* The only time such a reduction has happened was at the end of the
Apollo program, which was five percent of the federal budget at its
height. Now you have a situation in which NASA was getting maybe a tenth
of that level of funding, and some areas are being cut to a quarter,
half or two-thirds that already tiny amount.

That’s why virtually every astrophysics and planetary science mission is
getting canceled. The report from the AAS lays it all out, from Earth
observatories like Chandra and Fermi, as well as missions across the
Solar System like Juno at Jupiter and New Horizons, which took the first
closeup imagery of Pluto and is now exploring the Kuiper Belt.

All of these are fully functioning spacecraft, some of which have been
operating for decades. Chandra has enough fuel to last another decade
and New Horizons has enough fuel for a possible second rendezvous with a
body beyond Pluto. There are no other missions being planned to study
X-rays or explore the outer Solar System, so they are shut down, that’s it.

And there’s a more fundamentally insidious part of this bill. Hubble is
losing $8 million while JWST is losing $47 million. None of that can
come from the engineers and the communications facilities, because you
have to keep them both flying. So what happens is that cuts are from the
research money that’s going to astronomers that actually use and study
the data collected.

It’s explicitly zeroing out what is known as the Astrophysics Data
Analysis Program, which is money that goes to people to analyze data
that’s already been collected. We have this incredible archive of data
from all these missions going back for decades, and most of it is just
sitting there unexplored. It was hard to get funding to use that data
before, and now it will essentially be impossible. At least for US
researchers; there’s an irony that these data are being very heavily
used internationally, especially in China.

There’s also an extremely anti-intellectual component. Outside the US, a
lot of the basic science is done by institutions. Among of the most
famous are the Max Planck Institutes in Germany. In China as well, as
the research is done at government-funded facilities. But in the US, all
research is tied to universities.

And Trump has been very aggressive in going after anybody and anything
that’s even peripherally involved with universities. So cutting research
funding at NASA and NSF is also a general attack on academic studies.

*WSWS:* And that attack on culture has been a part of the US
establishment for decades. It is also reflected in the only part of
NASA’s budget that got increased, which is manned spaceflight.

*DW:* First, we should be clear that any increase there does not mean
there will be any money for science. Earlier in the administration, that
would have meant money going to Elon Musk and his proposed NASA head
Jared Isaacman, another billionaire. Now that Trump and Musk had their
falling out, it’s not clear who will take over. [Author’s note: Trump
has named Transportation Secretary Sean Duffy as interim NASA
administrator.]

There’s also the question of whether the whole Mars initiative will even
happen. Really, the money is for Trump’s political cronies. It’s to send
to home states of political allies. Billions of dollars are just going
to disappear for political reasons as opposed to anything related to
science. The entire motivation is just personal profit.

*WSWS:* Could you speak to the impact this will have on a mission that
hasn’t been launched, the Nancy Grace Roman telescope?

*DW:* There’s some interesting backstory there. We were discussing Roman
in the 1990s, back when it was known as the Wide-Field Infrared Survey
Telescope (WFIRST), alongside a similar project funded by NSF, the new
Vera Rubin Observatory in Chile. From a scientific perspective, they are
both designed to do similar things, take all-sky surveys. The Rubin will
do so in optical wavelengths while Roman is designed to do the same in
the infrared.

The initial idea was to find as many supernovae as possible and try and
pin down dark energy. And of course as the design progressed, their
missions expanded, but that’s essentially the goal of each instrument.

The problem that Roman has is that it is now very vulnerable because an
argument can be made that both do the same thing, and Rubin is going to
have an enormous amount of data well before Roman launches, which is
slated for 2026 or 2027. And the fact that it’s budget got cut from $407
million to $156 million, it may very well also get completely cut next
year. That’s more likely if the launch date slips, which it probably
will with so much less money.

*WSWS:* To segue now into the NSF, could you explain what’s happening
there? The AAS article paints an even more dire picture.

*DW:* There, you can see the budget is even more about taking money from
basic science and directly benefiting industry and commercial interests.
The request focused on only three specific areas, artificial
intelligence, quantum computing and biotechnology. And it explicitly
said that any research must be in collaboration with “other federal
agencies, industry and private foundations.”

The budget request also stated, “NSF is prioritizing investments that
complement private-sector R&D and offer strong potential to drive
economic growth and strengthen US technological leadership.”

There’s so much in those few words. First, the budget is getting cut
from $9 billion to just $3.9 billion. And that’s happening across the
agency and is expected to reduce the people getting funded from 330,100
to just 90,000. That’s going to hit students especially hard, a 70
percent decrease in graduate students and a 79 percent decrease in
undergraduate students. The number of personnel are going to be decimated.

Second, this is completely against the history of NSF. From the very
start it was created to be independent and do basic research. There was
not a commercial connection. At the time, there were plenty of companies
doing research, like Bell Labs, and they did some great work. But NSF
was set up to do the stuff the commercial labs wouldn’t do because they
didn’t see any immediate profit in it.

That phrasing indicates there’s a plan to basically turn NSF into a
commercial research lab, to focus only on what has an immediate profit
objective and then just abandon basic research.

This is going to destroy whole careers, as well as stop them before they
get started. I’m especially concerned at the devastation this is going
to have on graduate students, because so many rely on NSF grants for
their funding. Now essentially no one is going to get anything unless
they’re in those three fields.

They're killing off the new generation of scientists, the seed corn, the
people who will have ideas for the future. This applies to all the
sciences, because the same thing is happening at NIH. Young people are
bearing the brunt of this and it’s the young people that represent the
future. It’s throwing away our scientific future in the US, it’s as
simple as that.

*WSWS:* In addition to the truly staggering workforce reduction, one cut
that blew my mind was to LIGO, which is getting cut from $48 million to
$29 million, and shutting down one site. That project started in 1992
and the data collected was responsible for a Nobel Prize in Physics.

*DW:* It’s a perfect example of the ignorance of all this. LIGO is
trying to detect gravitational waves, and you simply can’t do it with
only one facility. You need at least two to confirm any detection and to
have any idea of the signal’s source. There are other facilities
internationally that are being brought online, but they don’t yet have
the sensitivity of LIGO.

What gives me hope is that young people like yourself are paying
attention to what’s happening and are trying to help. You can’t let the
attempts at demoralization work.

*WSWS:* Agreed, there’s a fight to be had, for science and for society
as a whole.

1 Comment...

The WSWS is taking the right approach, interviewing Dan Weedman, a
former NASA administrator. This man has the high level experience and
knowledge to nail what the Trump administration has in store for US
Science, be it NSF, NASA or any other of the numerous funding bodies
that have since the cold war provided the resources for basic science
in the US, and were a necessary component of their societal and
technological progress. Fascists are not just brutish nationalists,
they are also incredibly ignorant. They assume that only science that
"helps private industry" is necessary. But fundamental science is just
that: fundamental. It often has no obvious immediate technological
application.

   [cont] Would it have been OK to quash Einstein's work on special
   and general relativity prior to WW1, using the money to build
   chemical weapons or prisons? This science is so fundamental that
   decades elapsed before any industry had any need of it. Today,
   however, it is unthinkable that any space-based system could be
   built without, at least, special relativity. And general relativity
   has broadened the understanding of many mysteries in the observable
   universe, not to mention being the theoretical basis for gravity
   waves.


7/14/25:  FYI

APPROPRIATORS MOVING AWAY FROM TRUMP-LEVEL CUTS TO SCIENCE AGENCIES

The House Commerce-Justice-Science appropriations bill
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] released today proposes an 18.2% cut to
NASA science and a 20.7% cut to the National Science Foundation. The
cuts are not as deep as those proposed in the president’s budget
request. On Tuesday, the House Appropriations Committee will hold a
subcommittee markup [aip.us17.list-manage.com] for the bill, which
also covers the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and
the National Institute of Standards and Technology. 

The committee also plans [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to hold a
subcommittee markup [aip.us17.list-manage.com] today for the
Energy-Water funding bill for fiscal year 2026 and a full committee
markup [aip.us17.list-manage.com] of the bill on Thursday. The bill
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] proposes $8.4 billion for the Department of
Energy’s Office of Science, a 2% increase from the fiscal year
2025-enacted level. In comparison, the president’s budget request
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] proposed a 14% cut to the Office of
Science. Budget numbers for these agencies and more will be added to
FYI’s Budget Tracker [aip.us17.list-manage.com] as they are released.

The Senate Appropriations Committee may revisit its own CJS bill this
week after last week’s full committee markup,
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] during which subcommittee Chair Jerry Moran
(R-KS) said the bill would maintain science agency budgets near
current levels, including a $9 billion budget for NSF and $24.9
billion for NASA that “protects key science missions.” It also would
have made employees of NOAA’s National Weather Service “incapable of
being furloughed and removed,” Moran said. The committee has not yet
released the bill text. Chair Susan Collins (R-ME) postponed the vote
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] on the bill after Democrats, along with
Sen. Lisa Murkowski (R-AK), inserted an amendment that would prevent
the Trump administration from interfering with plans to move the FBI
headquarters to Greenbelt, Maryland.

The committee rejected an amendment from Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-WI) to
restore grants at NSF that were terminated for reasons other than
financial mismanagement. Moran said he “shares the desire to see the
NSF have a bright future,” but worried the amendment was “overly
broad” by requiring the reinstatement of grants terminated due to
research fraud, malfeasance, or lack of scientific merit.


NIH TO CAP OPEN-ACCESS FEES

The National Institutes of Health announced [aip.us17.list-manage.com]
last week that it will cap the amount it pays in open-access fees for
NIH-funded research, starting in fiscal year 2026. Under the agency’s
open access policy, [aip.us17.list-manage.com] established under the
Biden administration and put into effect by the Trump administration
on July 1, NIH-funded research must be made freely available
immediately after publication. Some publishers have responded by
charging fees to researchers for each open-access article, which the
agency then covers, NIH Director Jay Bhattacharya said in an interview
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] with conservative podcast host Charlie
Kirk. Bhattacharya said charging for immediate open access while also
collecting subscription fees from government agencies is
“double-dipping.”

The agency did not specify the cap amount. The Department of Health
and Human Services seemed to allude to the policy in a statement to
Nature [aip.us17.list-manage.com] early this month, saying, “Science
journals are ripping the American people off with exorbitant access
fees and extra charges to publish research openly. HHS is working to
develop policies that conserve taxpayer dollars and get Americans a
better deal.” In the same statement, HHS retracted its earlier
announcement that it would cancel its subscriptions to Springer Nature
journals.


7/15/26:  AAS.  Subject: Policy Updates from AAS

We continue to be concerned by reports that NASA, NSF, and other
science agencies are being directed to prepare to operate at the deep
cut levels in the President’s Budget Request for FY2026.

The past few months have been a time of rapid change in the science
policy landscape. In addition to the advocacy carried out by the AAS
public policy team, many AAS members are also taking initiative to
address these concerns, share our science highlights and
advocate. Multiple AAS members participated in an event titled “The
Things We'll Never Know: A Science Fair of Canceled Grants”, held in
the foyer of a Congressional office building last week. Adam Riess,
who gave a speech at the event, has shared his experience in a post
for the AAS policy blog: 

Adam Riess: My Recent Experience Advocating for Science

We are also writing to share additional information and actions you
can take, based on developments since mid-last week, and upcoming
events this week.  

We continue to be concerned by reports that NASA, NSF, and other
science agencies are being directed to prepare to operate at the deep
cut levels in the President’s Budget Request for FY2026. We have
released a new action alert for you to easily write to and call your
members of Congress regarding this issue: 

Take Action Now

On Thursday, July 10, the Senate Appropriations Committee met to
discuss the Commerce, Justice, and Science (CJS) Appropriations bill,
which determines funding for NASA, NSF, and NIST. While the bill text
has not yet been released, statements from the CJS Subcommittee
members indicated that the bill kept funding relatively flat for our
science agencies, with $9 billion in funding for NSF (a $60 million
cut from Fiscal Year 2025), and $7.3 billion for the NASA Science
Mission Directorate (the same as FY2025). However, the bill has not
yet been favorably reported to the full Senate, due to disagreements
related to the FBI headquarters, which is also covered under the same
bill.  

The House has been discussing, in their respective subcommittees,
the Energy and Water bill, which covers the DOE Office of Science,
at 6:00 pm ET on 14 July, and their version of the CJS bill at 12:00
pm ET on 15 July. The Energy and Water draft bill provides $8.4
billion for the DOE Office of Science, while the CJS bill provides $7
billion for NSF, $6 billion for the NASA Science Mission Directorate,
and $980 million for NIST. We expect details to be released in the
subcommittee reports later this week. 

To learn more about the latest updates from DC, and how you can make a
difference, register for this webinar on Friday, 18 July at noon ET. 


7/17/25: FYI.  Higher Ed Groups Bring Indirect Cost Proposal to White
House

   The new model would rename facilities and administrative costs and change how
   they are calculated.

   Slides from a presentation on the current reimbursement model and
   agency notices announcing rate caps. COGR / NIH / NSF

A group of higher education associations is pitching the White House and
lawmakers on a new model for the federal government to reimburse indirect
research costs. The proposal comes amid the Trump administration’s push to
significantly reduce the amount that the federal government spends on those
costs.

Indirect costs, as the term implies, pay for expenses that support research
indirectly, such as facilities and administrative costs. The new model would
split indirect costs into two categories and change the way those costs are
calculated. It would also enable reimbursement for compliance and grant
management costs and eliminate the rate negotiation process.

Proponents of the model presented it at a webinar on Tuesday.

“The policy and the political environment have significantly shifted,” said Matt
Owens, president of COGR. He noted that four agencies have already moved to cap
indirect cost rates at 15% this year and said policymakers of both parties and
in both chambers of Congress have “expressed concerns” about indirect costs.
“This is the new policy, though it’s not in effect because of legal action,”
Owens added. “Frankly, the status quo is no longer an option.”

The proposed Financial Accountability in Research (FAIR) model would split
indirect costs into two categories: essential research performance support
(ERPS) and general research operations (GRO). ERPS covers costs that can be
calculated as part of specific projects, such as expenses related to regulatory
compliance, award oversight, information services, and facilities, while GRO
covers institution-wide costs such as human resources and procurement. These
terms would replace “indirect costs” and “facilities and administrative costs.”
The proposal would also rename “direct costs” as “research performance costs.”
The proposed funding structure is more aligned with those of private
foundations, according to an Association of American Universities FAQ on the
proposal.

The FAIR model emerged from feedback on two proposals the group presented in
June, former White House Office of Science and Technology Policy Director Kelvin
Droegemeier said. Droegemeier chaired the team of experts who designed the
model.

Using line items to tie funding for research support activities to specific
projects through ERPS ensures the accuracy of research costs, AAU’s FAQ states.
Droegemeier highlighted in Tuesday’s webinar that the new model would enable
reimbursement of compliance and grant management costs under ERPS, which he said
federal agencies have not funded for more than 30 years.

The FAIR model calculates most ERPS costs in raw dollars, though
facilities costs would be calculated as a percentage of the total
award budget. It also includes a simpler “base” option for calculating
ERPS that sets information services and facilities costs at 10% of the
budget, which an executive summary of the model says “may especially
be attractive to those not having the administrative resources to
benefit” from calculating project-specific costs of
research-supporting facilities. GRO costs would be limited to 15% of
the total award for all institutions, based on the group’s analysis of
costs not covered by the other categories, Droegemeier said.

Under the current model, indirect cost rates are often expressed as a
percentage of direct costs. For example, an indirect cost rate of 50%
means that for every dollar awarded as part of a research grant for
eligible direct costs, the institution would receive an additional 50
cents to cover indirect costs. This means the 50% rate would be
equivalent to one-third of the total award.  Toby Smith, head of
government relations and public policy at AAU, said that expressing
indirect rates as percentages of direct rates causes significant
confusion. “One great thing about this new model: it doesn’t talk
about rate. It talks about the percentage of $1 that goes towards
research,” Smith said. “I heard a member of Congress on one of the
talk shows talking about...indirect costs...and they used that rate as
the percentage of the dollar. They’re totally wrong, but that’s what
has gotten out there,” Smith added.

The new model would eliminate the rate negotiation process that allows
institutions to use indirect cost rates much higher than the 15% de
minimis rate. For example, Droegemeier’s institution, the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, has a rate of 58.6%. It also adds a
two-year timeline for institutions to prepare for the transition from
the current indirect cost model to the FAIR model.

Presenters said OMB is working to update the federal regulations that
govern indirect cost reimbursement, and the group met with OMB last
week to introduce the final proposal. The group has also presented the
model to OSTP and members of Congress.

Owens said, depending on how OMB intends to proceed, “there is a
pathway” toward instating a 15% cap. “We are working in good faith, we
believe they are working in good faith,” he later added. “There are
going to still be disagreements.  We’re hoping that our process will
take us further down that road, that we can reach agreement on what we
believe is the best option going forward, and knowing that there will
be adjustments as we go.”

So far, some lawmakers have shown support for developing a new policy
and pausing the Trump administration’s caps. The House Appropriations
subcommittee responsible for the Department of Energy stated in its
funding bill report that it “supports the Administration’s efforts to
increase the accountability of taxpayer resources and provide further
transparency of facilities and administrative costs.” However, it
adds, “A blanket indirect cost rates policy, while well-intentioned,
does not fully address the unique nature of the department’s research
and development work” and directs DOE to pause its implementation of a
15% cap while working with the research community to develop new
indirect cost rate policies.

Smith said in the webinar that members of Congress who blocked a 2017
attempt to implement indirect cost caps have now told researchers to
“come up, as a community, with an alternative model, or we can’t
defend you in Congress this time.”

“If we don’t have something, we have nothing to negotiate with, and
you will end up with that 15% flat rate, which I don’t think anybody
thinks is a good idea,” Smith added.

Droegemeier asked meeting attendees to give further feedback on the
model and show support for it. “We as a community really need to be
together on this,” Droegemeier added. “And I think the thing that
would cause the biggest problem would be if we start arguing among
ourselves about the model, because the alternatives, as we’ve seen…
they’re not very attractive for the future of America.”


7/21/25: Science.  Hundreds of NASA Employees, Past and Present, Sign
  Letter of Formal Dissent

    The signatories of the "Voyager Declaration" warned the space
    agency's leadership about the consequences of major budget cuts
    that would halt many science missions.

A public letter from NASA employees
<https://www.standupforscience.net/nasa-voyager-declaration> on Monday
urges leaders of the space agency not to carry out deep cuts sought by
the Trump administration.

"We are compelled to speak up when our leadership prioritizes political
momentum over human safety, scientific advancement and efficient use of
public resources," the employees wrote in the letter. It is addressed to
Sean Duffy, the secretary of transportation, whom President Trump
appointed this month as acting NASA administrator.

Cuts to NASA programs have been arbitrary and in defiance of priorities
set by Congress, the NASA employees said. "The consequences for the
agency and the country alike are dire," they wrote.

In an email statement, Bethany Stevens, the NASA press secretary, said
NASA would never compromise on safety. "Any reductions -- including
our current voluntary reduction -- will be designed to protect
safety-critical roles," she said.

"To ensure NASA delivers for the American people, we are continually
evaluating mission lifecycles, not on sustaining outdated or
lower-priority missions," Ms. Stevens said.

Upheaval within NASA continued on Monday, when Makenzie Lystrup,
director of NASA;s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md.,
announced she was "stepping aside" on Aug. 1. In an email sent to center
employees at 12:45 p.m. and shared with The Times, she did not give a
reason for her departure. Cynthia Simmons, the center's deputy director,
will take over as acting director.

"I am honored to have been part of this incredible journey with you,"
Dr. Lystrup wrote.

The NASA letter follows similar letters of criticism by federal
employees at the National Institutes of Health and the Environmental
Protection Agency Dr. Jay Bhattacharya, the N.I.H. director, said he
welcomed respectful dissent, but the E.P.A. placed 144 employees who
signed that agency's letter on leave.

"We're scared of retaliation," said Monica Gorman, an operations
research analyst at the Goddard. She said that staff "go to the bathroom
to talk to each other, and look under the stalls to make sure that no
one else is there before we talk."

Ms. Gorman is one of 287 current and former NASA employees who signed
the letter, although more than half did so anonymously. More than 15,000
people work at the space agency. Prominent scientists outside of NASA,
including 20 Nobel Prize winners, also offered their names in support.

The N.I.H. letter inspired some people at NASA to put together a
similar effort. The N.I.H. letter writers had called their dissent the
"Bethesda Declaration" -- the agency is in Bethesda, Md. -- and the
NASA letter writers called theirs the "Voyager
Declaration," in honor of Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, the two
NASA space probes launched in the 1970s that continue to function as
they fly through interstellar space.

"One of the messages that NASA management has been passing down to every
employee is that no one is coming to save us, including Congress," said
one of the organizers of the letter, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity out of fear for retaliation. "So the Voyager Declaration is
one effort to raise our voices and speak out to save ourselves," the
person added.

The letter is framed as a "formal dissent" an official process at NASA
for registering disagreements that managers may not want to hear. It
was part of changes instituted at NASA after the losses of the
Columbia and Challenger space shuttles when concerns of some engineers
were brushed aside.


7/21/25: CNN.  In scathing letter, NASA workers rebuke "rapid and
  wasteful changes" at agency

By Jackie Wattles <https://www.cnn.com/profiles/jackie-wattles>, CNN
Updated 5:02 PM EDT, Mon July 21, 2025

A group of 287 scientists and current and former NASA employees has
issued a declaration lambasting budget cuts, grant cancellations and a
“culture of organizational silence” that they say could pose a risk to
astronauts’ safety.

The document — titled “The Voyager Declaration” and dedicated to
astronauts who lost their lives in tragic spaceflight incidents of the
past — is addressed to acting NASA Administrator Sean Duffy a staunch
Trump loyalist who abruptly replaced Janet Petro, a longtime NASA
employee, in the agency’s top role on July 9. The letter has 156
anonymous signatories and 131 public signatures — including at least
55 current employees.

Hours after the letter published, Goddard Space Flight Center Director
Makenzie Lystrup, who has led the NASA campus since 2023, abruptly
resigned. Lystrup did not give a reason for her departure.

“Major programmatic shifts at NASA must be implemented strategically so
that risks are managed carefully,” states the letter to Duffy, a former
member of Congress, prosecutor**and reality TV personality who also
currently serves as Transportation secretary. “Instead, the last six
months have seen rapid and wasteful changes which have undermined our
mission and caused catastrophic impacts on NASA’s workforce.”

The letter raises concerns about suggested changes to NASA’s Technical
Authority, a system of safety checks and balances at the agency.

Established in the wake of the 2003 Columbia shuttle disaster that
killed seven astronauts, the Technical Authority aims to ensure mission
safety by allowing NASA employees at all levels of the agency to voice
safety concerns to leaders outside their direct chain of command.

“If you have a significant disagreement with a technical decision that’s
being made, (the system) gives someone an alternate avenue that’s not
their project manager or program manager” to express that concern, a
source at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland who asked
to remain anonymous for fear of retribution, told CNN.

Changes to that system “should be made only in the interests of
improving safety, not in anticipation of future budget cuts,” the
declaration reads.

The source said that they considered looming changes “a really scary
prospect, especially for my colleagues who work directly on the human
spaceflight side of things.”

The letter comes as the agency is grappling with the impending loss of
thousands of employees and broader restructuring.

In a statement, current NASA press secretary Bethany Stevens responded
to the Voyager Declaration. “NASA will never compromise on safety. Any
reduction — including our current voluntary reduction — will be designed
to protect safety-critical roles,” she said.

“Despite the claims posted on a website that advances radical,
discriminatory DEI principles, the reality is that President Trump has
proposed billions of dollars for NASA science, demonstrating an ongoing
commitment to communicating our scientific achievements,”**Stevens added
in the statement.**“To ensure NASA delivers for the American people, we
are continually evaluating mission lifecycles, not on sustaining
outdated or lower-priority missions.”

In her resignation email to staff, Lystrup said she was leaving her post
at Goddard with confidence in Cynthia Simmons, the current deputy center
director who will take over on an interim basis, and “the center
leadership team, and all of you who will help shape the next chapter of
this center.”**Lystrup did not mention agency leadership. Her last day
will be August 1.

Spokespeople at NASA headquarters and Goddard Space Flight Center did
not immediately respond to a request for comment on Lystrup’s resignation.


    A risky resistance

The signed letter is the most recent in a string of declarations
rebuking proposed cuts and changes at other federal agencies.

Some National Institutes of Health employees led the way in June,
publishing a declaration opposing what they called the politicization
of research.

Another letter, signed by federal workers at the Environmental
Protection Agency earlier this month, resulted in about 140 people
being placed on administrative leave. At least some of those workers
will remain on leave until at least August 1, “pending the Agency’s
inquiry,” according to internal email correspondence obtained by CNN.

One signatory of the NASA letter who spoke to CNN said they felt that
expressing dissent against the Trump administration may pose a risk to
their livelihoods, but they believed the stakes were too high to remain
silent.

Ella Kaplan, a contractor employed by Global Science and Technology Inc.
and the website administrator for the NASA Scientific Visualization
Studio, said she decided to publicly attach her name to the Voyager
Declaration because “the overall culture at NASA has very much shifted —
and it feels a lot less safe for me.”

“That’s been felt kind of universally by most minority employees at
NASA,” Kaplan said.

While Kaplan said her job has not yet been directly threatened, in her
view, “I’m a member of the LGBT community...and I’m probably going to be
fired for this at some point, so I might as well do as much community
organizing as possible before that point.”


    A changing culture

The letter and its signatories implore Duffy to evaluate recent policies
they say “have or threaten to waste public resources, compromise human
safety, weaken national security, and undermine the core NASA mission.”

The declaration’s criticism of changes to NASA’s Technical Authority
stem from statements made at an agency town hall in June. During that
meeting, NASA executives said they planned to attempt to make the
Technical Authority more “efficient.”

“We’re looking at: ‘How do we do programs and projects more efficiently?
And how much should we be spending on oversight?’” said Vanessa Wyche,
NASA’s acting associate administrator.

Garrett Reisman — a former NASA astronaut and engineer who later served
as a SpaceX advisor — told CNN that he believes implementing some
changes to the Technical Authority may be welcome. He noted that NASA
may have become too risk averse in the wake of the Columbia tragedy, and
the current structure may be hampering innovation.

But, Reisman said, any changes to the space agency’s safety backstops
need to be made with extreme care. And currently, he said, he does not
trust that will happen.

“I have very little confidence that it will be done the right way,”
Reisman, who signed the declaration, said. “So far, this administration
has used a very heavy hand with their attempts to remove bureaucracy —
and what they’ve ended up doing is not making things more efficient, but
just eliminating things.”


    Trump’s anti-DEIA efforts

The signatories who spoke to CNN each expressed opposition to President
Donald Trump’s directives to shutter Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and
Accessibility — or DEIA — initiatives.

At NASA, leadership complied with Trump’s executive order by
shuttering a DEIA-focused branch, scrubbing pronouns from email
signatures, and removing references to a pledge made during the
president’s previous term to land a woman and person of color on the
moon for the first time. The space agency also shuttered employee
groups that lent support to minority workers.

The source who spoke with CNN anonymously said that DEIA policies not
only ensure a welcoming work environment — they’re also essential to
practicing sound science.

“The concept of inclusivity being a pathway to better science is
something that has become really entrenched in the overall academic and
scientific community in the last decade or so,” the source said, adding
that the changes “set an immediate tone for the destruction that was
going to come.”


    ‘Indiscriminate cuts’

Among the other policies that the letter decries is the Trump
administration’s call for NASA to shutter some projects that have
Congressional backing — a move the signatories say is wasteful and
“represents a permanent loss of capability to the United States both in
space and on Earth.”

The NASA employee told CNN that leadership has already begun shutting
down some facilities that the Trump administration put on the chopping
block in its budget proposal, despite the fact that Congress appears
poised to continue funding some of them.

“We’ve also been hearing repeatedly passed down from every level of
management: No one is coming to save you; Congress is not coming to save
you,” the source said. “But it seems like Congress is moving towards an
appropriations that’s going to continue to fund our projects at
approximately the same level.”

The source noted that they have first-hand knowledge of leadership
beginning to decommission a clean room — a facility free of dust and
debris where sensitive hardware and science instruments must be prepared
for spaceflight — despite the fact that there are ongoing tests
happening at the facility.

The Voyager Declaration also criticizes what it refers to as
“indiscriminate cuts” planned for the agency.

The White House’s proposal to slash NASA’s science budget by as much as
half has been met with widespread condemnation from stakeholders who say
such cuts threaten to cripple US leadership in the field.

Recent agency communication to staff has also noted that at least 3,000
staff members are taking deferred resignation offers, according to an
internal memo, the authenticity of which was confirmed to CNN by two
sources who had seen the communication.

Broader workforce cuts could also be on the horizon. NASA leadership
under Petro also worked on an agency restructuring plan, though the
details of that initiative have not yet been made public.

Other Trump-era changes denounced in the Voyager Declaration include
directives to cancel contracts and grants that affect private-sector
workers across the country and plans to pull the space agency out of
some projects with international partners. The White House budget
proposal calls for defunding dozens of projects, including the Lunar
Gateway space station that the US would have worked on with space
agencies in Canada, Europe, Japan and the United Arab Emirates.

The letter and its signatories argue these policies are wasteful,
squandering investments that have been years or decades in the making.

“American taxpayers have invested a lot of money in my education and
training directly,” the Goddard source said. “I’m in it for the public
service — and I want to return that investment to them.”

Comments...

I can't say I'm surprised. NASA is one of the premier scientific
agency in the government and has a lot to do with measuring
atmospheric conditions that prove the climate is getting hotter. Can't
have that! However, it does not matter if you measure it or not, it is
still happening.  You will still get swept away by the next unexpected
flood.  It's kind of like congress repealing the law of gravity.
Things will still fall at 9.8 meters per second squared, no matter
what they do.

I think one day when someone makes first contact with us, we'll look
back on these days as the straw that broke the camel's back on
international cooperation. NASA is the one organization that is TRULY
bipartisan and international. I sure hope we don't live and die to
regret the cuts to NASA. Example - cooperation with the Russians on
lifting astronauts to the ISS - everything is wrong with our
relationship w/Russia except this.

    I get what you're saying about the agency's overall mandate. But,
    for what it's worth, I think highly-educated scientists by nature
    are generally NOT going to be aligned with the conservative and
    religious right, while science and research overall don't tend to
    be a Republican focus. The friction that exists may be more
    fundamental than the purpose of NASA.

The current administration sees only waste when it comes to advancing
research. It appears those in charge must feel we have gleaned enough
knowledge and so why throw more money to the wind?  Our scientists and
researchers are amazing. They are the very best in the world, and we
will lose them to more enlightened countries who understand the
importance of moving forward.

We once had a President that chose for America to commit it's
resources to go to the Moon, not because it was easy, but because it
was hard. Now we have one that chooses to dissemble NASA because he
needs the money to give tax relief for the wealthy.

NASA is pure magic. It has been the habitat of scientists and
engineers from the world over who came together to build something
beyond earthly dreams. I was privileged to work at Goddard as a
contractor for 20 years. To see it fall into the hands of ignorant
yahoos is unbearable. Who will in future come from far away to pour
their energy and expertise into science here after seeing the fate of
their colleagues?

When the Challenger and Columbia disasters happened, America learned
what happens when you move fast and break things. But the DOGE
muskrats weren't even alive to learn those lessons. They are the fake
it until you make generation.

[Reply to complaint about bloat] If you have kidney disease you don't
remove the brain to fix it. Surgery must be done with precision and a
sense of direction.  I'm sure the complacent said the same thing when
Hitler was coming to power - don't worry - it will run its course and
we'll be back to normal.


=====

7/21/25:  RWO signed the letter of support for the NASA employees
          who sent the letter to Duffy.  

TO my Gmail account...

[7/21/25]: Thanks for adding your name in support of the NASA heroes!
  11:53 PM (8 minutes ago)
	 
to me
Stand Up for Science

Robert,

Thank you for adding your name in support of the NASA heroes and their
public Declaration of Dissent. Read it here.

Your solidarity in joining with us all in support of our colleagues at
the NASA is immensely important. It creates the pressure on the
Interim NASA Administrator Sean Duffy to "change course" from his
policies of dismantling and his defunding of the three key levers of
the NASA mission --  the science, the staff and the funding programs. It
also increases the political pressure on every member of Congress to
stand up to Trump's anti-science agenda.

If you have the means, consider a gift of $25 or more to help fuel our
powerful grassroots movement now.

Thanks again for standing up for science in America!
Colette


A gift to Stand Up for Science helps us end censorship and political
interference in science, secure and expand scientific funding, and
defend and support programs that offer equal opportunity for ALL
people to participate in science.

=====


7/21/25: FYI.  Subject: This Week: Science budgets advancing in
Congress / Top appropriators look to block indirect cost caps / NSF
board to meet

CONGRESS ADVANCING BUDGETS FOR NSF, NASA, COMMERCE

House appropriators will hold a full committee markup for their
version of the Commerce-Justice-Science bill on Thursday, following
Senate appropriators who approved their version of the bill last
week. The Senate bill proposes the National Science Foundation receive
$9 billion, a slight cut from the $9.06 billion budget that Congress
enacted for fiscal year 2025 but a slight increase over the final
budget when accounting for the $234 million that President Donald
Trump eliminated from NSF’s construction budget in March. By contrast,
the House bill would cut NSF’s budget by about 20% while the Trump
administration is seeking a more than 50% cut.  Notably, the Senate
bill passed through committee with bipartisan support, while Democrats
are opposing the House version.

The report accompanying the Senate bill details proposed allocations
and policy direction across programs at NASA, NSF, and the Commerce
Department. For instance, it specifies amounts for several of NSF’s
STEM diversity programs, indicating lawmakers’ interest in continuing
them. NSF said in April that it would continue to operate broadening
participation programs that make use of protected characteristics such
as race and gender if they are “prioritized” in appropriations
language, amid mass cuts to grants deemed related to diversity,
equity, and inclusion. The report also says the committee “rejects”
the administration’s proposal to close one of the two existing Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) sites and directs
NSF to advance both the Extremely Large Telescope projects to the
final design stage, despite the administration’s intent to only
advance one telescope. The House CJS report will be made public
sometime this week.

For NASA’s Science Mission Directorate, Senate appropriators propose
near-level funding, compared to an 18% cut in the House proposal and a
nearly 50% cut in the president’s budget request. The Senate report
states that the committee rejects the president’s proposed termination
of 55 missions across the science directorate and NASA’s STEM
engagement office. The Senate bill also maintains funding for the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Office of Oceanic
and Atmospheric Research after the president’s request proposed moving
a small portion of its programs to other departments and eliminating
the rest.

“While the committee could be open to realigning some programs to enhance
operational outcomes, the absence of detailed plans hinders informed
decision-making,” the report states. For details on program-level funding
proposals, consult FYI’s Federal Science Budget Tracker.

TOP APPROPRIATORS LOOK TO BLOCK INDIRECT COST CAPS

The top Republican and Democrat on the Senate Appropriations Committee
successfully amended the Commerce-Justice-Science appropriation bill
last week to continue use of the current indirect cost rates
negotiated with higher education institutions rather than implementing
caps, as several agencies have attempted to do this year. They also
added text to the bill report that “notes the academic research
community’s efforts to develop a consensus proposal” on indirect
costs. Similarly, the House appropriations bill report for the
Department of Energy released last week directs the agency to pause
the implementation of a 15% cap while it works to develop a new
indirect cost policy with stakeholders. “A blanket indirect cost rates
policy, while well-intentioned, does not fully address the unique
nature of the department’s research and development work,” the report
states.

NSF GOVERNING BOARD TO MEET

The National Science Board will meet on Wednesday in an open session that will
feature a panel discussion on basic research with industry representatives
followed by a presentation of awards for leadership in and increasing public
understanding of science and technology. The board will also hear updates on the
implementation of President Donald Trump’s “gold standard science” executive
order and on the Graduate Research Fellowship Program. The board presented an
initiative to seek outside funding for the fellowship program at its last
meeting. The program initially selected 1,000 recipients in April, compared to
around 2,000 in previous years. The National Science Foundation has since
awarded 500 more fellowships, overwhelmingly to students in computer science,
physical sciences, and engineering. During a closed session on Thursday, the
board will discuss NSF’s staffing, the planned relocation of its headquarters,
and the search for a new agency director following Sethuraman Panchanathan’s
resignation in April.


7/22/25:  NasaWatch: NASA Chief of Staff Action Items

Keith's note: according to this Reuters article: "NASA Chief of
Staff Brian Hughes speaking at the same town hall, agreed, saying it
would 'probably be considered irresponsible' to wait for the
congressional budget process. The letter added that Hughes recently
ordered NASA science programs targeted for cancellation in Trump's
budget request to stop issuing press releases celebrating new
scientific results and achievements."

In addition, senior staff at recent meetings at NASA with Hughes have
been told not to expect any help from Congress in pushing back against
the plan embodied in the President's FY 2026 Budget Request
i.e. multiple mission cancellations and large personnel layoffs. This
is in direct contrast to an offer made last week to senior NASA staff
by Acting Interim Administrator Duffy to listen to -- and then
consider -- pushing for budget increases (restoration) for items
planned for deletion -- if a solid case can be made.

And today the "Voyager Declaration", signed by many NASA employees
complaining  about a variety of unpopular actions, certainly made
national news. Word has it that Hughes and his staff were not at all
pleased by this or the news coverage -- especially CNN's
article. Meanwhile, consolidation of and deletion of various NASA
social media accounts continues. Of course this has a side benefit of
allowing those missions now scheduled to go away to not have any
mention made of whatever scientific results they are still quite
capable of providing. This of course hastens the ability for them to
just fade away.

Comments...

Feels more and more like naming Duffy was just a cover to oust Petro
and put Brian Hughes in charge.



From public.policy@aas.org Wed Jul 23 12:33:07 2025
Date: Wed, 23 Jul 2025 12:33:00
From: American Astronomical Society <public.policy@aas.org>
To: rwo@virginia.edu
Subject: We Are Having an Impact! Keep Up the Fight!

Thank you for all your hard work in support of science funding and maintaining
science integrity.
[on.jsp?ca=c275c462-f4fd-4173-b04d-fa9aa53d5c3f&a=1118606474481&c=9b0fce40-5880
-11e4-92db-d4ae52712b64&ch=9c303260-5880-11e4-93e0-d4ae52712b64]
 
[0eeddd83-7ead-41e9-bde3-40862d011d43.jpg?rdr=true]
 
[S.gif]

Dear Colleagues, 

Well, it has been a long six and a half months since the start of the year! The
AAS policy team and I have been hounding you for much of this time with policy
alerts and requests for action. Not only have many of you heeded the call, but
we are starting to see the impact of your efforts! This week you surpassed 2,500
unique advocates, resulting in nearly 6,000 messages to members of Congress.
Thank you so much for all your hard work in support of science funding and
maintaining science integrity. These efforts have been recognized and we are
starting to see the results of this good work.

In the Senate committee markup of the Commerce, Justice, and Science
Appropriations bill for FY2026, the committee has rejected the cuts in the
President’s proposed budget and essentially kept funding for NASA and the
National Science Foundation at FY2024 levels! In addition to providing robust
levels of funding for our science agencies, the Senate committee also stated
their support for workforce development, education, and broadening participation
programs in STEM. The details are outlined in this summary from the AAS policy
team. We must continue to keep up the pressure as this preferred budget goes to
the Senate floor for passage and the House considers its own spending bill.
There is still work to do, but we are making good progress.

There are also members of the House who are pushing back against the
administration’s attempt to prematurely implement the cuts proposed in their
budget request. These members are even reaching out to the AAS directly for
support, asking us to help bring bipartisan support for action. Your efforts as
AAS members helped to secure the 64 signatures of congressional members — in
just one day! — on a bipartisan letter to Sean Duffy, the new acting head of
NASA, requesting that he “refrain from taking actions to implement a drastic 47%
cut proposed in the President’s FY2026 budget request for NASA’s Science Mission
Directorate.”

Our efforts are making an impact! However, as the saying goes, this is a
marathon and not a sprint. We need to continue to stay in the fight! Those AAS
members who have not yet participated in advocacy with your congressional
delegation, please call and write to let them know that science funding is an
essential part of maintaining US scientific leadership, innovation, and
education. Please use our Action Alert to call or send your email now! Your
members of Congress will be back in their home districts for the month of
August, so please consider setting up a meeting with them to share personal
impact stories. Please refer to our guidelines for setting up meetings here, and
feel free to email public.policy@aas.org if you need assistance. 

Let’s keep up the good work!

Thank you,
Dara Norman, AAS President


7/25/25: IHE.   Columbia Deal a ‘Threat’ to Higher Ed, Experts Warn / The
  $221 million settlement extends beyond tackling antisemitism. Some
  experts said it’s an example of “coercion,” while others say
  Columbia had it coming.

By  Jessica Blake <https://www.insidehighered.com/author/jessica-blake>

The Trump administration’s landmark settlement with Columbia University
threatens the institution’s independence and academic freedom, higher
education experts say. Many warn that the agreement marks a threat not
only to higher education, but also to democracy at large.

The agreement, announced Wednesday comes after Columbia faced months
of intense pressure from the White House to address alleged
antisemitism on campus and agree to a number of demands. It’s the
latest example of how this administration is pushing the boundaries of
its authority to secure changes that conservatives have long sought in
higher ed.

In the end, Columbia agreed to comply with the government’s extensive
demands while forking over more than $200 million to unlock $400
million in federal grants.

Education Secretary Linda McMahon celebrated the long-anticipated deal
as an example of “commonsense reform,” saying in a statement that
Americans have “watched in horror” for decades as the most esteemed
campuses were occupied by “anti-western teachings and a leftist
groupthink.”

“Columbia’s reforms are a roadmap for elite universities that wish to
regain the confidence of the American public by renewing their
commitment to truth-seeking, merit and civil debate,” she added. “I
believe they will ripple across the higher education sector and change
the course of campus culture for years to come.”

But some higher education faculty, legal experts and free speech
advocates say the settlement is unlawful, pointing to the quick
investigation, vague allegations and unprecedented way federal funds
were retracted before Columbia had a chance to appeal. Some went as far
as to compare the executive actions to past power grabs by authoritarian
leaders in countries like Hungary, Turkey and Brazil.

    The very real danger is that if elite institutions choose to
    submit to the authority of the Trump administration, the whole
    rest of the industry will follow.” -- Kevin Carey, vice president
    of education and work at New America

Columbia’s capitulation “represents the upending of a decades-long
partnership between the government and higher education in which
colleges and universities nevertheless retained academic freedom,
institutional autonomy and shared governance,” said Lynn Pasquerella,
president of the American Association of Colleges and Universities. “It
signals a rise in authoritarian populism in which higher education is
positioned as the enemy in a fight against corrupt, inefficient and
elite institutions that are out of touch with the needs of the working
class.”

A federal taskforce convened to combat antisemitism first presented
the university with the sweeping list of demands in March. The
decision was simple: comply or permanently lose the federal funds that
were frozen a week prior. The Ivy League institution agreed a week
later to nearly all of the president’s demands. But the funds remained
frozen.

Though Columbia wason the “right track,” McMahon and other task force
members said the university had a long way to go. While talks with
Columbia continued, the task force turned its focus to Harvard
University and made similar demands. The Crimson, however, rejected
the task force’s mandates and sued after it froze more than $2.7
billion in federal funds.

Many higher education leaders say that Columbia had a choice and
chickened out. But regardless, they add, Trump’s ultimatum amounted to
extortion.

“Whether you applaud or despise the terms of the deal, the way in which
the government is operating, and getting universities like Columbia to
make these deals is fundamentally coercive,” said David Pozen, a
constitutional law professor at Columbia. “Therefore, it poses a
significant threat to the future of higher education as well as the rule
of law.”

Pozen and others fear that this will only further embolden Trump to take
similar strikes at more institutions.

“The very real danger is that if elite institutions choose to submit to
the authority of the Trump administration, the whole rest of the
industry will follow,” said Kevin Carey, vice president of education and
work at New America, a left-leaning think tank. “It will be like a stack
of dominoes one falling after the other.”


    Chilling First Amendment Rights

The Trump administration has said the measures taken against Columbia
were necessary to address antisemitism on the campus as officials
accused the university of failing to protect Jewish students and later
said Columbia violated federal civil rights law.

As part of the settlement, Columbia is paying $21 million to address
allegations that Jewish employees faced discrimination. The agreement
also requires the university to hire a student liaison to support Jewish
students.

But the settlement goes beyond antisemitism and focuses on unrelated
campus policies. For example, starting in paragraph 16, the
administration says that Columbia students cannot reference race in
admissions essays and mandates that the university must provide annual
data showing both rejected and admitted students broken down by racial
demographics, grade point averages and test scores.

The settlement also requires similar data concerning the admission of
international students, bans the participation of transgender women in
female sports and calls for Columbia to establish a process to ensure
that all students “are committed to the longstanding traditions of
American universities, including civil discourse, free inquiry, open
debate, and the fundamental values of equality and respect.”

In Carey’s view, by buckling to the Trump administration, Columbia
surrendered its identity as a private institution—and so would any other
university that follows suit.

“The essence of an independent university is deciding who is part of
your academic community, and Columbia University has surrendered that,”
he said, referring to the admissions provisions.

Will Creeley, legal director of the Foundation for Individual Rights and
Expression, said that, in addition to admission practices, this
settlement and its “blatant disregard for federal law” will upend
academia’s core commitment to fostering First Amendment rights.

“The reforms themselves require Columbia students to commit to laudable
values like free inquiry and open debate,” Creeley wrote in an email to
/Inside Higher Ed. /“But demanding students commit to vague goals like
‘equality and respect’ leaves far too much room for abuse, just like the
civility oaths, DEI statements, and other types of compelled speech FIRE
has long opposed.”

Michael Thaddeus, a Columbia math professor and president of the faculty
union chapter, said though administrators insist they won’t allow the
government to interfere, that assurance doesn’t mean such acts won’t occur.

“Students and scholars at American universities must be free to think
and speak their minds,” he wrote in a statement to /Inside Higher Ed/.
“The settlement … risks imperiling this freedom.”


    Ditching Due Process

Beyond the terms of the settlement itself, education advocates are
primarily concerned with the process used to reach the agreement, which
they said didn’t follow procedural norms.

Pozen, the Columbia law professor, outlined in a blog post
<https://balkin.blogspot.com/2025/07/regulation-by-deal-comes-to-higher-ed.html>
Wednesday night how the task force bypassed nearly all statutory
requirements of such an investigation.

Past administrations, Pozen explained, have pushed the boundaries of
regulation, utilizing more guidance letters and fewer formal rule-making
sessions with public comment. But even those enforcement strategies
consisted of policies that applied to all institutions and were based on
thorough investigations, not rushed accusations, he added.

“The means being used to push through these reforms are as unprincipled
as they are unprecedented,” Pozen wrote. “Higher education policy in the
United States is now being developed through ad hoc deals, a mode of
regulation that is not only inimical to the ideal of the university as a
site of critical thinking but also corrosive to the democratic order and
to law itself.”

Conservative higher education experts who support the administration’s
approach acknowledged that it lacked due process, but also argued that
Columbia deserved the stipulations and financial penalty it faced.

“When campuses like Columbia and Harvard allowed antisemitism to run
amok, the consequences were going to follow,” said Frederick Hess,
director of education policy studies at the American Enterprise
Institute, a right-leaning think tank. “The chickens had come home to
roost.”

Hess added that the Trump administration was not the first to “short
circuit” regulatory processes, citing the Biden administration’s loan
forgiveness campaign and Obama’s use of the gender equity law, Title IX,
to combat sexual assault as examples.

    [Yes, regrettably, Dem administrations had also pushed the
    envelope...though not anywhere near as egregiously as Trump.]

“We live in a time when concern for legal requirements and norms is
increasingly dismissed across the political spectrum,” so to chastise
one administration for skipping steps and not the other is problematic,
he said. “I continue to be deeply troubled every time [the procedural
statutes] are broken. But you cannot have asymmetrical expectations for
the parties in these kinds of debates.”


    Shifting the Political Paradigm

While a few figures, including former Harvard president and treasury
secretary Lawrence Summers, applauded the resolution, many faculty
members and higher education leaders expressed fear that their
institutions could be next.

Kirsten Weld, a history professor and president of the Harvard faculty
union chapter, said she is “very concerned” and rejects any suggestion
that Columbia’s settlement should be a “blueprint” for her own
institution’s negotiations.

“This is about deploying the coercive power of the federal government to
dictate to universities, faculty, and students what they should teach,
research, and learn, on ideological grounds,” she wrote in an email to
/Inside Higher Ed./ “It is a dangerous abuse of federal regulatory and
civil rights enforcement authority to obtain … what it would otherwise
be unable to mandate through proper legislative channels.”

Ted Mitchell, president of the American Council on Education, also
suggested via email that “this cannot be a template for the government’s
approach to American higher education.”

This administration “reached a conclusion before an investigation and
levied a penalty without affording Columbia due process—that is
chilling,” he wrote. “This administration must return to following the
rule of law.”

But many policy experts are doubtful that will happen any time soon.

When looking beyond just Harvard and Columbia, one thing becomes clear,
said Dominique Baker, an associate professor of education and public
policy at the University of Delaware, the president is inciting an
“outright attack” on higher education, and he has no plans of slowing down.

From the political ousting of University of Virginia president James
Ryan to the legislative termination of countless academic programs in
Indiana with little to no faculty input, Baker identified one defining
thread: curtailing the power of democratic institutions.

“We are in a very dangerous time, both for U.S. higher education, but
more importantly for our country,” she explained. “These types of
outright attacks on colleges and universities are typically the moves of
autocrats and dictators, often seen as signs of authoritarian takeovers.”

She later added, “if one wanted to overthrow our constitutional
republic, these are the types of moves you would make.”


[7/24/25]: WP.  White House touts deal with Columbia as critics decry
  ‘chilling’ precedent / Education lawyers and advocates said
  Columbia’s deal with the White House was a potentially dangerous
  government intrusion into higher education.

...Under the terms of the deal, announced late Wednesday, Columbia
WILL PAY MORE THAN $200 MILLION TO SETTLE CLAIMS over antisemitism and
discriminatory hiring. In return, the government will unfreeze more
than $1 billion in federal grants and funding to the university.

...In agreeing to the deal, the elite Ivy League institution in New
York City is entering uncharted territory: It is making an enormous
payment to the federal government despite not admitting any wrongdoing
while relinquishing a certain measure of oversight to an independent
monitor.

Columbia’s deal follows one between the University of Pennsylvania and
the Trump administration this month. The administration had announced
this spring that it was freezing $175 million to Penn over its
policies on transgender athletes – which were in alignment with the
NCAA’s rules at the time. Penn agreed to no longer allow transgender
women to compete on its female teams and said it would send apology
letters to swimmers who were affected by its policy.

The Columbia agreement, months in the making, came as the school had
grown increasingly concerned about its ability to maintain some of its
research operations in the face of the funding freezes. It stipulates
that the government will not have authority to dictate Columbia’s
admissions decisions, hiring or the content of academic speech — a key
provision for the school, which had sought to retain academic freedom
amid intense federal pressure.

...“Columbia was put in an untenable position by the outrageous
actions of the executive branch of the government,” said Ted Mitchell,
president of the American Council on Education. The Trump
administration, he added, “reached a conclusion before an
investigation and levied a penalty without affording Columbia due
process.”

...Among the institutions negotiating with the Trump administration
are the University of Michigan and Duke, Northwestern, Cornell and
Brown universities. Those schools are in talks with the White House
about its concerns and at least some are in “early mutual agreement to
find middle ground,” said one person familiar with the negotiations,
who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe sensitive matters.

...“What we’re witnessing here is the emergence of a new model for
regulating universities by the government,” said David Pozen, a
professor at Columbia Law School.  It’s “regulation by deal,” Pozen
said, in which the Trump administration attempts to set higher
education policy through one-off, bilateral agreements with
universities that it specifically targets. He called it “an
extraordinarily coercive and arbitrary way to set policy. … Everyone
in higher education should be worried about the manner in which this
deal was constructed.”

...The agreement goes far beyond the administration’s original focus
on alleged discrimination against Jewish students and faculty, Hartley
said, setting a potential precedent on issues such as international
student enrollment, requirements for single-sex housing and women’s
sports participation.

...The largest chunk of the settlement money — $200 million — will go
directly to the U.S. Treasury, senior administration officials told
reporters Thursday, speaking on the condition of anonymity in
accordance with the ground rules for the call.  Columbia WILL PAY A
FURTHER $21 MILLION to Jewish faculty and staff members to settle
investigations brought by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission. Administration officials called it the largest such
settlement ever for victims of antisemitism, and the largest in almost
20 years for any form of discrimination or harassment.  Those funds
will be distributed to Jewish professors and other staff,
administration officials said, including janitors who were trapped in
a university building when it was taken over by pro-Palestinian
protesters in the spring of 2024.

In addition to the financial settlement, the 22-page agreement
requires Columbia to ensure that its programs “do not promote unlawful
DEI goals.” The university must provide data on admitted and rejected
students broken down by race, grade-point average and standardized
test scores.

The agreement also requires Columbia to review its
international-student admissions policy and directs the school to
reduce its “financial dependence” on such enrollment. Columbia has
more foreign students than nearly any other university in the country,
with more than 20,000 enrolled in the 2023-2024 school year, according
to the Institute of International Education.

While many observers were shocked by the large financial hit, some
experts said that Columbia had walked away with a good agreement,
given the extraordinarily difficult circumstances.

...Pozen, the law professor, said it’s difficult to evaluate an
agreement that was the product of a corrupt process. “If someone mugs
you on the street and takes some of your cash but not all of it, did
you get a good deal?” he said.

But Adam Lehman, president and CEO of Hillel International, a network
of campus Jewish groups, was pleased that the agreement recognized
“egregious violations” of civil rights of Jewish students at Columbia
and Barnard College, its sister school, as well as steps Columbia has
taken to address them.

...Under the terms of the agreement, a mutually agreed-to outside
monitor will have authority to oversee the university’s compliance and
have access to extensive data about university admissions and hiring
to assure that racial preferences are not being used.

Comments...

This is nothing more than a shakedown by Trump's criminal regime.

    Only a totally blind reader of the WP could claim that enforcing
    the 1964 Civil Rights Act is a shakedown. Got it?

       So true. Everyone knows the GOP loves the spirit and intent of
       the Civil Rights Act and it’s so wonderful to see this
       administration on its righteous crusade for freedom and justice
       for all. I heard everyone in ICE detention is getting dessert
       with their dinner tonight.

Can we stop with the lies that this has ANYTHING to do with "cracking
down on anti-Jewish bias"?!

Damage is done. Columbia's reputation as a leading research university
is finished. The best and the brightest will go elsewhere, like
outside the USA.

Hurling slogans like "From the river to the sea Palestine will be
free" in the face of Jewish students, faculty or alumni makes
everybody know that the speaker is calling for the destruction of the
state of Israel. Anti-Zionism in this form is antisemitism, as stated
on the site of the American Jewish Community, which hosts an
interesting analysis of the concept of "anti-Zionism" as another form
of antisemitism

There goes democracy! They folded like a cheap suitcase. Extortion,
indeed! And now it will never stop.


7/25/25: NYT, Columbia Walked a Tightrope on Its Way to a $200 Million
  Settlement With Trump / Talks in Washington. An expert on
  negotiation. A balancing act. The university chose cooperation over
  litigation, a strategy both pilloried and praised.

Just after Memorial Day, Claire Shipman, the acting president of
Columbia University, went to see Linda E. McMahon, President Trump’s
education secretary...  It was a tough meeting, but there were some
surprisingly collaborative moments. Ms. McMahon said she wasn’t
interested in destroying the university. She empathized with how hard
it was to run a large organization. She wanted to talk about issues
beyond antisemitism, like the need to tolerate a spectrum of voices on
campuses.  Rather than dismiss those concerns out of hand,
Ms. Shipman, a former journalist who was co-chair of Columbia’s board
of trustees before stepping in as acting president, listened.  It was
a telling moment that helped produce the seismic events of Wednesday.

... According to a recent survey commissioned by Columbia, 62 percent
of Jewish students last year said that they did not feel accepted for
their religious identity at the university. There was also a broader
problem of intolerance, some felt, with too many people choosing to
shut out, rather than engage with, other points of view.

...The very tactic of withholding scientific research money to
pressure Columbia over campus unrest was probably illegal, a
Massachusetts judge had already found. But some on campus,
particularly those concerned about the fate of scientific research,
welcomed the deal, which they hoped would let Columbia regain its
footing.

...[In March] Columbia’s 21-member board of trustees, in consultation
with the school’s lawyers, decided to negotiate. Lawyers advised the
board that suing would probably bring short-term wins, but that the
government could still remove Columbia from consideration for future
grants. That would be an extremely unstable situation, risking
billions of dollars of important research funding.  Under Katrina
Armstrong, then the new interim president, the board landed on a
compromise that it felt it could live with. The university modified
each demand in a way that it believed would not compromise core values
or academic independence.

Instead of a total mask ban, for example, masked demonstrators would
be required to show identification when asked. Instead of putting a
Middle Eastern Studies department under receivership, a step that
would remove its independence, a new vice provost would review the
department’s work, along with that of other departments.

...It also became obvious internally at Columbia that the blow to its
science enterprise was much bigger than the original $400 million.
Columbia now says that most of its $1.3 billion in annual federal
grant funding had been frozen or stopped. The university was also
barred from competing for new grants. In May, about 180 people were
laid off. Every day, scientists were getting other offers and were
uncertain if Columbia was going to be a home for major research
anymore.

...In the eyes of Columbia’s negotiators, much of what they agreed to
— pledges to follow civil rights laws and to not engage in illegal
diversity practices — would have been necessary anyway under a Trump
administration. Most of the internal reforms, such as centralizing
control over student discipline and appointing at least 36 security
officers with arrest powers, are changes they had already committed
to.

Comments...

As a Columbia alumni I am appalled and ashamed that they capitulated
to this morally bankrupt extortioner.

That Columbia had or has an antisemetism problem is absurd.  20% of
Columbia's students are Jewish, while the population of Jewish people
in the United States is a mere 2.4%.  Jewish Americans are over
represented nearly 10 fold, while African Americans are under
represented by half.  

Columbia caved. The principles of free speech should be respected,
it’s a right of all of us. The decision to put research funding ahead
of freedom of speech demonstrates that this is more important to the
university than a constitutional right. Certain groups of students
will be silenced. There will be government monitoring.  Now, more than
ever, constitutional rights must be prioritized. Science can wait.  If
I had a child at university here, they would not be continuing to
attend.

It's terrible to watch people, most of whom would be considered elite,
or at least privileged, collapse when challenged by a government that
is acting illegally and irresponsibly.

This 'arrangement' would seem to have less to do with anti-Semitism
than this administration's continuing assault on academic values and
freedoms. Columbia has kissed the ring, showing that intimidation and
blackmail will be rewarded.  Science, knowledge and thought are the
short and medium term casualties. In the long run the demise of the US
as an intellectual leader and exemplar seems inevitable. But who needs
intelligence, when you're holding the gun and you've corrupted and
intimidated the congress and the courts?

Hi, I work at a ‘New Ivy’ institution in the Boston area. We have
received signals from our senior leadership that we intend to keep our
heads down but when the WH comes knocking, we will stand up for
ourselves and fight. Not everyone will be Columbia, who we’re so
disappointed with. We’ve heard from neighboring colleges that they
will also stand and fight, which gives us confidence that there will
be strength in numbers. We’ll be here long after this dark period
ends, and to capitulate is to, as far as I’m concerned, condone what’s
happening. Shame on Columbia!

I try to imagine myself as an 18 yo freshman walking on campus past
completely masked, shouting, taunting, drum banging men and women
twice the size of me with menacing and threatening signs and later
witnessing violent acts of breaking glass and doors, where half the
protestors are not even students and many of my mideast studies and
"humanities" professors are shouting and waving fists. Welcome to
college and free speech and "peaceful demonstration."

I laugh to think how Columbia will soon be sanctimoniously be asking
18 year olds to submit essays explaining their values, when they’ve
just shown the world they stand on none. This school is tarnished.

Harvard alum here who would rather see his Alma Mater resist death on
its feet rather than die on its knees.

Already, the WSJ is reporting that Trump is seeking similar deals with
a bunch of other universities - including a ruinous payoff (I refuse
to call these “settlements”) from Harvard. This is extortion, pure and
simple.

I do find it remarkable that the core of the agreement is Columbia
conceded to ‘follow existing civil rights law and to not allow illegal
diversity measures’.  Columbia strayed from this and thankfully will
revert to what they should have done all along.

I'm sure among the thousands of students there are some antisemitic
people.  But the university as a whole?  Antisemitic?  Puleeze.

It was activist hostility (and administrative indifference or even
support for it) that got us here in the first place.  I don't think
the average American is siding with Columbia or pro-Palestinian
activists.  Would love it if the left took the lesson from this fiasco
that immersing your politics with hate speech is an ineffective social
movement tactic that they should abandon permanently.  The American
public is not with them.

Well, let's put it this way.  Should we sympathize with people who
assist a crime organization to commit crimes because they think
they'll be treated better?


7/25/25:  Van Scoyoc Associates 
Subject: Washington Week in Science - July 25, 2025


NIH to limit AI use, cap P.I. grant applications at 6 per year 

  The National Institutes of Health is telling researchers to limit
  the number of applications they submit and restrict how much they
  use artificial intelligence in writing their proposals. The agency
  announced last week that it will accept no more than six “new,
  renewal, resubmission or revision applications” per principal
  investigator per calendar year. Read more:  Inside Higher Ed

  Trump administration asks the Supreme Court to let it move forward
  with NIH grant cuts The Trump administration asked the Supreme Court
  on Thursday to give it the green light to cancel hundreds of grants
  awarded by the National Institutes of Health because they were tied
  to issues like gender identity and diversity, equity and
  inclusion. Solicitor General D. John Sauer asked the high court to
  halt a lower court decision that ordered the NIH to reinstate the
  grants and required the Trump administration to continue paying out
  roughly $783 million in awards. Read more:  CBS News

US fertility rate reached a new low in 2024, CDC data shows 

  The fertility rate in the U.S. dropped to an all-time low in 2024
  with less than 1.6 kids per woman, new federal data released
  Thursday shows. The U.S. was once among only a few developed
  countries with a rate that ensured each generation had enough
  children to replace itself — about 2.1 kids per woman. But it has
  been sliding in America for close to two decades as more women are
  waiting longer to have children or never taking that step at
  all. Read more:  ABC News

Microsoft stops relying on Chinese engineers for Pentagon cloud support

  Microsoft on Friday revised its practices to ensure that engineers
  in China no longer provide technical support to U.S. defense clients
  using the company’s cloud services. The company implemented the
  changes in an effort to reduce national security and cybersecurity
  risks stemming from its cloud work with a major customer. The
  announcement came days after ProPublica published an extensive
  report describing the Defense Department’s dependence on Microsoft
  software engineers in China. Read more:  CNBC


Senate appropriators fund dozens of threatened NASA science missions 

  A Senate spending bill would restore funding for dozens of NASA
  science missions threatened with cancellation in the
  administration’s 2026 budget request, but is silent on one flagship
  program. The Senate Appropriations Committee released July 18 the
  report accompanying its commerce, justice and science (CJS) spending
  bill for fiscal year 2026 that the committee approved on a 19-10
  vote a day earlier. That bill includes $24.9 billion for NASA,
  slightly more than the $24.838 billion that the agency received in
  2025 and far more than the $18.8 billion proposed by the White House
  in May. The bill includes $7.3 billion for NASA science programs,
  approximately the same that the agency received in 2025.  The White
  House proposal, by contrast, requested just $3.9 billion for science
  programs. “The Committee rejects the mission terminations proposed
  in the fiscal year 2026 budget request for Earth Science, Planetary
  Science, Astrophysics, and Heliophysics,” the report stated. “The
  Committee is concerned by the plan to end 55 missions across
  Science, which was driven by budget pressure rather than scientific
  value.” Read more:  Space News

    [The missing "flagship" is apparently the Mars Sample Return Mission,
    according to spacepolicyonline.com]

In scathing letter, NASA workers rebuke ‘rapid and wasteful changes’ at agency 

  A group of 287 scientists and current and former NASA employees has
  issued a declaration lambasting budget cuts, grant cancellations and
  a “culture of organizational silence” that they say could pose a
  risk to astronauts’ safety.  The document — titled “The Voyager
  Declaration” and dedicated to astronauts who lost their lives in
  tragic spaceflight incidents of the past — is addressed to acting
  NASA Administrator Sean Duffy, a staunch Trump loyalist who abruptly
  replaced Janet Petro, a longtime NASA employee, in the agency’s top
  role on July 9. The letter has 156 anonymous signatories and 131
  public signatures — including at least 55 current employees. Read
  more:  CNN

NASA loses another senior official as tension about the agency's future grows

  The director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced her
  resignation Monday, marking yet another high-profile departure as
  questions loom about the agency’s budget and future. Makenzie
  Lystrup, who has served as director of the center in Maryland since
  April 2023, will leave the agency on Aug. 1, according to a NASA
  statement. Read more:  NBC News

Senate approps bill would fully fund NSF, rejecting Trump’s cuts 

  The Senate Appropriations Committee advanced legislation that would
  dodge the sharp cuts to the National Science Foundation that
  President Donald Trump suggested, and the House softened. The
  Senate’s bill would provide the National Science Foundation with $9
  billion in “support for key research in quantum information science
  and artificial intelligence,” among other areas. That’s effectively
  on par with current agency funding levels. The House proposed the
  NSF get $7 billion, while the administration had recommended $3.9
  billion for the NSF. Republicans on a party-line vote rejected an
  amendment by Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wis.) to restore more than 1,500
  NSF grants canceled by the Trump administration “except in cases of
  financial mismanagement, research fraud or malfeasance." Read more: 
  Politico Pro


Congressional committees push back on Trump administration's proposed NOAA
budget cuts 

  Lawmakers from both parties have so far rejected steep cuts to the
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) proposed by
  the Trump administration and reiterated their support for a fully
  staffed National Weather Service (NWS) during recent committee
  meetings, which included key appropriations markup sessions. For
  fiscal year 2026, the Trump administration proposed cutting NOAA's
  budget by roughly 25%, including the elimination of its research
  division, the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), and
  making major reductions to other key offices such as the National
  Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI), the world's largest
  provider of weather and climate data.

  The House Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science
  and Related Agencies advanced a spending bill with bipartisan
  support last week that would fund NOAA at levels mostly in line with
  budgets of previous years. The fiscal year 2026 Commerce, Justice,
  Science appropriations bill provides roughly $5.8 billion to NOAA in
  2026, a 6% decrease from the previous year. However, it restores a
  majority of funding for NOAA's Operations, Research and Facilities
  (ORF) account, which includes OAR. The Senate's version of the bill
  allocates approximately $6.14 billion to NOAA for fiscal year 2026,
  just below the $6.18 billion approved for 2025. While this
  represents a modest overall decrease, the Senate Committee on
  Appropriations voted to boost spending for the agency's Operations,
  Research and Facilities (ORF) account, adding $68.7 million. Read
  more:  ABC News



7/28/25: NYT.  The Bull Market for Economists Is Over. It’s an Ominous
 Sign for the Economy.  / Earning a Ph.D. in economics has long been a
 reliable path to affluence and prestige. Not anymore.

...For decades, earning a Ph.D. in economics has been a nearly
foolproof path to a lucrative career. Even as bearers of advanced
degrees in history, English or anthropology struggled to find gainful
employment, the popularity of economics as an undergraduate major
created plenty of tenure-track teaching positions, while government
agencies snatched up Ph.D. economists in bulk. Those looking for even
larger paychecks could turn to tech companies, Wall Street and
consulting firms, which bid up the price of economists as if they were
a bespoke cryptocurrency.

Last year, the average base salary for newly hired economics
professors at major research universities was more than $150,000,
according to the American Economic Association, and their compensation
swelled to about $200,000 once bonuses and summer teaching were
included. As recently as the 2023-24 academic year, the employment
rate for Ph.D. economists within a few months of graduation was 100
percent...  Job satisfaction topped 85 percent.

Those glory days seem to be ending. Universities and nonprofits have
scaled back hiring amid declining state budgets and federal funding
cuts. At the same time, the Trump administration has laid off
government economists and frozen hiring for new ones.

Tech companies also have grown stingier, and their need for high-level
economists — once seemingly insatiable — has waned. Other firms have
slowed hiring in response to the economic uncertainty introduced by
President Trump’s tariffs and the possibility that artificial
intelligence will replace their workers, even if those workers have a
doctoral degree.

“The advent of A.I. is also impacting the market for high-skilled
labor,” said Betsey Stevenson, a labor economist at the University of
Michigan, in an email. “So the whole thing is kind of a mess.”

Of course, if it were only some egghead economists scrambling to find
work, that might be not be terribly consequential. But the same forces
bedeviling economists are crimping employment for other highly trained
scientists and social scientists, as well as for many recent college
graduates, whose jobless rate has been unusually high for an otherwise
strong economy. 

The drop in government payrolls and federal funding for universities
and nonprofits alone is a major problem, since they support two to
three times as many jobs for college graduates as for those without
degrees. In some cases, workers with Ph.D.s are displacing others with
master’s or bachelor’s degrees.

Then there is the potential impact on the country’s future. Marcia
McNutt, a geophysicist who is president of the National Academy of
Sciences, said a sharp drop in the number of research jobs in the hard
sciences and social sciences would send Ph.D.s abroad. Their flight
will deprive the government of the brainpower it needs to perform
basic functions and leave U.S. firms less innovative and competitive.

“U.S. industry is incredibly dependent on the training that is done in
colleges and universities,” Dr. McNutt said. “When the top people go
elsewhere, we’ll be left with the B team in America.”

...The University of California, Santa Barbara, typically produces 10
to 15 Ph.D. economists a year, and about one-third to half of them
secure tenure-track academic jobs right away, said Daniel Martin, an
economics professor and the graduate program’s job placement
officer. A few more typically land jobs at federal or international
agencies...Just before the pandemic, essentially “all of those who
wanted academic jobs would have gotten them,” Dr. Katz said.

...Then in January, Mr. Trump took office and put the kibosh on
federal hiring. Hundreds of prospective jobs vaporized overnight,
including more than a dozen that Dr. Fullagar had applied for at
agencies like the Treasury Department and the Census Bureau.  “That
was a brutal moment,” said Dr. Martin, the placement officer at Santa
Barbara. “I contacted our department and said, ‘Listen, I need to
prepare you for the possibility that we may be graduating people
without jobs” — something that hadn’t happened in recent memory.

...[He said] he was still optimistic about the future of the economics
profession, partly because the job recession was only a slowdown
relative to the highly auspicious employment climate that reigned for
decades.  “Who has that?” he said. “Not even computer science has been
able to place people just at will.”

Comments...

Here we are in the midst of a real competition with China in math,
science, engineering, and technology and Trump hobbles the United
States STEM force with big funding cuts.  If you wanted to allow China
to take the lead, it would be hard to find a better way.  Trump wants
to have the US ahead of China in AI.  How does that square with
cutting off funding for the talent pipeline?  Let’s face it. It’s not
about making America great again. But it is all about giving more
money to the very top earners (and himself).  Someone after him will
have to clean up the mess that the US will become,

One bright spot would be to replace congress with AI. It could not
possibly do any worse.

"In some cases, the tenured ranks have become clogged by baby boomers
putting off retirement."  This is not unique to economics. They simply
will not leave. There are plenty of faculty on my campus who are well
into their 70s and a few in their 80s. They are showing no signs of
leaving anytime soon.

Trump is bad for the economy 
Trump is bad for middle and working class Americans 
Trump is only good for Trump

Virtually all economists are wedded to the idea of exponential,
unlimited growth. In a world of 8 billion souls and mass extinctions,
we don't need more of these economists, we need economists who embrace
a de-growth economy where housing is available and affordable and
wages provide a decent standard of living.  It is time we got rid of
all of Wall Street's apologists.

Unfortunately, with the end of the defined benefit pension, many
people, not just in universities, can’t risk retiring because they
depend on the whims of the market for their survival.

     It’s especially true in academia (a close friend is 84 and has no
     plans to retire) but it is true in lots of sectors.  It is an
     especially bitter pill for Gen X.

America is already at B level by the damage done to its finest
universities and DOGE slashes and destruction...The ongoing "brain
drain" will be America's greatest loss , and other nations greatest
gain in the decades to come.

Are you kidding?  Try to get a tenure track job at a major university
with a PhD in any field right now.  Universities are terrified and NOT
HIRING.  The common wisdom is that STEM is the holy grail, but young
STEM PhDs are being eaten alive by no jobs available. These young
people have worked and studied for years and their careers are being
ruined.  Not everyone is sauntering over to Europe to be offered a big
job.  A generation of scientists is being destroyed.

As a lab tech at a university, I work with lots of doctoral
students. In this most recent graduating class, most of them had to
pivot at whiplash speed away from tenure track and civil service
positions. A few have pursued post-docs. The rest are looking for
positions outside of the USA. The tide which went a long way to
sustaining American greatness has turned, and the brains that fueled
our research and development gains are now washing into other
nations. I asked what advice they would give incoming graduate
students. Invariable, the answer was to become fluent in a second
language.

[To an anti-liberal critic] Interesting that you point to health care
as an area supposedly being dragged down by immigrants. In reality,
our healthcare system would collapse without the thousands of
immigrants working as nurses's aids and other support
staff. Immigrants skew younger, and therefore have fewer needs for
healthcare. And, many pay into Medicare without being eligible for the
benefits.

On the other hand, there are and will be plenty more jobs as farm
laborers.

If you want to know what the U.S. will look like in a generation just
look closely at the Trump administration’s hires for all the top
positions.  With very few exceptions not only are they not the A Team
but most of them aren’t even qualified to make the B Team.

    [The "Duh" team]

A physicist, a chemist, and an economist are stranded on an island
with nothing to eat. A can of soup washes ashore. The physicist says,
“Let’s smash the can open with a rock.” The chemist says, “Let’s build
a fire and heat the can.” The economist says, “Let’s assume that we
have a can opener.”

The hard truth: If you are getting a PhD in Economics, make sure it is
from Chicago, Princeton, Stanford or MIT.  Otherwise, be prepared to
do gigs for Uber.

This is concerning and I have seen this across many fields. Many that
once were set on getting their PhD are changing paths, I hear people
say given it’ such a difficult process to go through and question if
it’s worth it in this environment. I’ve seen it in online forums as
well, from PhD’s to MD’s, and definitely in mstp (MD/PhD)
programs. Many say why bother with research with the uncertainty of
grant status and the job market...  I don’t think many people
understand the long term implications, the readers here likely do but
the average person has no clue how this can impact the US in the
future. It will not be ‘great’ when we fall behind in every area of
research.

Ignorance is bliss. The current government is collectively missing a
highly functioning brain; and hence, cannot know what is being
lost. There is ample research and anecdotal evidence that traces the
American economic growth and technological prowess to the promotion of
basic research and applied sciences since the Second World War,
primarily supported by the federal government. It is the American
ingenuity and entrepreneurship that took these seed corn of science
and grew into the great harvest of commercial value and GDP growth. It
is futile to argue with the current Luddites and high priests molded
in the Taliban mindset regarding value of education, let alone
research.  If the world power is what the current government is after,
it must know that missiles, rockets, deep penetrating bombs, lasers,
satellites, modern digital communications to not grow on trees. Many
basic and applied research from hard sciences and social sciences make
them happen. By cutting off supply of scientific seed corn, the US is
brainlessly and with spite and malice turning off the spigot to US
prosperity.

Anyone who thinks you can hang on as a Professor at the University of
California does not know what they are talking about. I sit on a
committee that reviews the work of every faculty member every two to
five years. You must be satisfactory in teaching/mentoring, in
research, and service (either administratively to the school or
externally to the scientific community). A deficiency in any of the
three, and you will be given an unsatisfactory rating. At that point,
you are given a remediation plan. If that fails, you are out, even if
you have tenure. I am familiar with the dossier of practically every
senior full Professor at my campus, and only four of them in the last
year were unsatisfactory. Indeed, most of the 70 and 80-year-olds were
doing a fantastic job. We are so lucky to have them. Note that most
faculty retire in their late 60s, so the older ones are a special
elite group. I should also note that most retirement benefits max out
after 20 years of service, so staying longer does not increase those
any further.


7/29/25:  

From: Astronomy Department Chairs <Astro-Chairs@virginia.edu>
To: Faculty Department <astro-faculty@virginia.edu>
Subject: [astro-faculty] State of the Astronomy Workforce

Hello –

Chairs are being asked to report some information to the AAS about the effects
of policy changes since January 2025 on astronomy departments.  Information will
be anonymized and aggregated.

To that end, could you please report to me (if you desire – this is voluntary):

 1. Whether you have had any of your federally funded grants reduced or
    terminated since January 2025?
 2. Whether you have expectations of federally funded grants being reduced or
    terminated in the next 6 months?
 3. Do you have comments on any research or funding disruptions because of
    federal policy changes?
 4. Did you curtail any student summer research programs due to funding or
    policy changes instituted at the federal level since January 2025?
 5. Were you or any students unable to travel to a professional conference
    because of unexpected cuts to funding or policy changes instituted at the
    federal level since January 2025?
 6. Did you have any trouble publishing an accepted paper due to a lack of
    funding or policy changes since January 2025?

Unfortunately, this request came with an “ASAP” request attached…so quick, short
replies are better than essays that will take you a while to get back to me.  So
let’s just say that I would appreciate responses by midnight Wednesday night,
July 30.

Thanks,
Steve


7/29/25: FYI.  Hundreds of Science Agency Employees Criticize Changes
Under Trump

Current and former employees at NSF, NASA, NIH, and the EPA have signed onto
letters enumerating their concerns.

Hundreds of employees at the National Science Foundation and NASA
signed onto letters issued last week that protest policy changes since
the start of the Trump administration, including workforce reductions
and grant terminations. The letters reveal major shifts inside the
agencies, only some of which have previously been reported.

“As civil servants, NSF employees are bound by their oath to uphold
the Constitution,” the NSF letter reads. “That oath now compels us to
call attention to actions that jeopardize NSF’s mission, its
independence, and the foundational laws that protect the federal
workforce from politicization and abuse.”  NASA’s letter similarly
states that “we are compelled to speak up when our leadership
prioritizes political momentum over human safety, scientific
advancement, and efficient use of public resources.”

The NSF letter says fear of retaliation, lack of job stability, and
abrupt return-to-office orders pushed hundreds to retire early or
resign. The letter also highlights the administration’s plans to fire
staff in the Division of Equity for Excellence in STEM through
reductions in force.  NSF has lost one-third of its staff since the
start of the Trump administration, said Jesus Soriano, a program
officer at NSF and president of the union that represents the agency,
at a press conference with the top Democrat on the House Science
Committee. The agency had around 1,700 employees in January.

The NASA letter states that thousands of the agency’s civil servants
have resigned, retired early, or been terminated, “taking with them
highly specialized, irreplaceable knowledge.” The agency said Saturday
that nearly 4,000 employees, about 20% of NASA’s workforce, are
retiring early or resigning — fewer than 1,000 took the deferred
resignation offer in the first round that ended in February, while
3,000 accepted the offer in the second round that ended last week.

Both letters accuse the administration of interfering with
congressionally appropriated funding. The NSF letter states that the
White House is withholding $2.2 billion of the agency’s funds for
fiscal year 2025, while the NASA letter states that the agency is
closing out missions even though they are funded in FY25, representing
“a permanent loss in capability.”

The NSF letter criticizes Trump’s budget request for the coming fiscal
year, saying it would “cripple American science.” The request proposes
a 56% cut to NSF’s total budget and more than 70% cuts to biological
sciences, engineering, and STEM education. If enacted, these cuts
would eliminate funding for over 250,000 researchers and students, the
letter adds.

The NSF letter also highlights the administration’s “eviction” of the
agency from its current headquarters “without any transparent
planning, cost-benefit justification, or identified destination,” the
extension of probationary periods from one year to two, and a
secondary review process of NSF programs and proposals by “unqualified
political appointees,” which Soriano said is performed at high levels
of NSF with input from the Trump administration.

The NASA letter further criticizes cuts to diversity, equity,
inclusion, and accessibility programs and the proposed elimination of
the Office of STEM Engagement. It accuses the administration of
“abandoning” allies by canceling NASA participation in international
missions, and protests changes to NASA’s system of safety checks and
balances.

The NSF signers include 149 current agency employees, some of whom
chose to sign anonymously and others whose names were redacted in the
public version of the document. The NASA signers include 363 current
and former NASA employees from every NASA center and mission
directorate, some named and some anonymous.  The NSF letter asks the
House Science Committee to “defend” NSF’s civil service protections
and mission, while the NASA dissent letter, like those signed by
employees of the National Institutes of Health and the Environmental
Protection Agency in the last two months, addresses concerns to the
agency head. NIH employees were the first to issue their dissent
letter, also known as the Bethesda Declaration, on June 9, and signers
met with agency Director Jay Bhattacharya last week.

NSF employees sent the letter as an official whistleblower complaint
to protect the signers from retaliation, according to a Democratic
press release, after the publication of the EPA letter resulted in
over 100 signers being placed on administrative leave.

The NASA letter references an agency policy directive on respecting “diverse
views… with no suppression or retribution.” The letter says it constitutes a
formal dissent that “warrants a timely review and decision by higher-level
management.”


AUGUST 


8/5/25:  FYI

EPA, DOE QUESTION CLIMATE RISKS IN GHG REG ROLLBACK

The Environmental Protection Agency released a proposal
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] last week to rescind its 2009 endangerment
finding, which underpins the agency’s authority to regulate greenhouse
gas emissions. As part of the justification for the move, the
Department of Energy released a report [aip.us17.list-manage.com] on
the climate impacts of greenhouse gas emissions that concludes the
warming induced by carbon dioxide “appears to be less damaging
economically than commonly believed, and that aggressive mitigation
strategies may be misdirected.” DOE Secretary Chris Wright tapped five
scientists known to be skeptical of climate change impact assessments
to produce the report, which criticizes aspects of global climate
models and notes some positive effects of elevated carbon dioxide
concentrations.

The EPA will hold a virtual public hearing [aip.us17.list-manage.com]
Aug. 19 and 20 to receive comment on the proposal, while DOE issued a
request for comment [aip.us17.list-manage.com] on the report that
closes Sept. 2. “Speaking from the perspective of individuals who have
commented on the IPCC and NCA reports only to see our comments
ignored, we plan to take a different approach,” wrote Judith Curry,
one of the DOE report authors, in a blog
post. [aip.us17.list-manage.com] “Rather than primarily seeking to
defend our report, we regard the open comments as an opportunity for
dialogue, learning, and clarification of areas of disagreement,” she
added. Curry wrote that she hopes for the “redirection of climate
science… away from alarmism and advocacy and towards better
understanding of the fundamentals of climate dynamics.”

Various scientists whose work is cited in the report have said it uses
their research in a misleading way. [aip.us17.list-manage.com] One
such scientist, Zeke Hausfather, wrote [aip.us17.list-manage.com] that
the report “cherrypicks figures and parts of studies to support a
preconceived narrative that minimizes the risk of climate change.”
Mainstream climate scientists are now mulling ways to offer a
coordinated rebuttal [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to the report.


TURMOIL CONTINUES OVER UNIVERSITY GRANT CANCELLATIONS

The University of California, Los Angeles was cut off from funding
from the National Science Foundation and the National Institutes of
Health last week after the Justice Department concluded
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] that the university had violated civil
rights law in its “deliberately indifferent” response to students’
claims of antisemitism. UCLA Chancellor Julio Frenk protested the
decision, stating [aip.us17.list-manage.com] the university has taken
various actions against antisemitism and that “this far-reaching
penalty of defunding life-saving research does nothing to address any
alleged discrimination.”

Other universities hit with similar cuts have begun to strike deals
with the White House to have research funding restored: Columbia
University agreed [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to pay a $200 million
fine to the federal government over three years while Brown University
agreed [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to pay $50 million over ten years to
workforce development organizations in Rhode Island.  Both agreements
also include restrictions on diversity and inclusion initiatives,
among other provisions. Meanwhile, other universities such as Harvard
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] and Northwestern [aip.us17.list-manage.com]
have announced layoffs that are related to the funding cuts and other
financial pressures, and the Massachusetts governor is proposing
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] to allocate $400 million to offset cuts at
universities in the state and at Boston hospitals.

The outlook for grant funding remains uncertain even for NIH grants
that have already been judicially ordered to be restored. Some
scientists whose grants were included on the list for reinstatements
said [aip.us17.list-manage.com] they have not received the funding as
of July. Meanwhile, five higher education associations asked
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] NIH Director Jay Bhattacharya last week to
restore not just the approximately 900 grants subject to the court
rulings but all grants “terminated pursuant to the same directives,
using the same process, and according to the same termination
rationale,” which total more than 2,000.



8/7/25:  FYI

For new faculty and others ordering big-ticket items, the import taxes
can be a gut punch.

Since the start of the second Trump administration, the US science
community has been confronted with the axing of jobs, the slashing of
federal funding, attacks on diversity, and increased visa
restrictions. Tariffs are an added twist. On 2 April—which Trump
referred to as Liberation Day—new tariffs on many countries went into
effect. A roller coaster followed, as rates were raised, lowered, and
paused.  The threats and negotiations have sowed uncertainty in the
science community and beyond about the cost of goods.

Tenure-track experimentalists who are establishing their labs are in a
particular bind.

New faculty members receive startup funds, uniquely flexible money
that they use for equipment, students and postdocs, conferences, and
their own summer salaries.  Startup funds in the more expensive
areas—notably atomic, molecular, and optical physics, condensed-matter
physics, and biophysics—can be as high as $5 million, although around
$1.5 million is typical.

Tariffs were not yet a concern for tenure-track faculty who negotiated
their job terms in the past few years. But today, as they attempt to
establish themselves in their new positions, ponying up tens of
thousands of dollars more for big-ticket items can be a hardship—or a
dealbreaker.

In early 2024, a tenure-track physicist at a midsize public university
on the West Coast ordered laser equipment from China. It didn’t arrive
in the US until April 2025, at a time when the tariff rate exceeded
100%. The equipment was stuck in customs, accumulating storage fees,
until the physicist could pay the nearly $130 000 import tax. An
internal university loan to the physics department saved the day, says
the department chair.

The payload for a planned long-duration, high-altitude balloon mission
to study cosmic star formation at terahertz frequencies was test-flown
last year in New Mexico. Jeffrey Filippini, who leads the development
of the cryogenic camera for the mission’s upcoming Antarctic flight,
was slapped with a $10 000 tariff for an infrared filter from the
UK. Joaquin Vieira, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Dacen Waters started his tenure-track position at the University of
Denver last fall. He studies how electrons behave in 2D materials,
work that could eventually feed into quantum computing
technologies. Last October, he ordered a dilution refrigerator for
about $750 000 from a Finnish company—one of three, all in Europe,
where such instruments are available. He had been trying to figure out
how to cover $75 000 at a 10% tariff rate. But when Trump threatened a
30% tariff in July, he was panicking. At that rate, he says, he’d have
to cancel the order, which per the contract would mean forfeiting $200
000.  At press time, the expected tariff had come down to 15%, which
Waters says he can make work. “I just need to decide what I will give
up to pay the tariffs,” he says.

“The tariffs have thrown a nasty curveball into everybody’s life,”
says Walter Silvesky, commercial managing director for the US arm of
the German company PI (Physik Instrumente). “It’s especially tough for
those in the academic sector.  Researchers have no mechanism for
dealing with extra costs.” In some cases, vendors refuse to prepare
firm bids because of the uncertainties on their end due to tariffs and
inflation. And university purchasing offices sometimes won’t approve
purchases without a fixed price.


8/07/25: IHE.  How Trump Forced Cuts at Wealthy Universities / Frozen
  research funding, rising endowment taxes and other concerns have
  prompted some of the nation’s wealthiest universities to shed jobs
  despite their multibillion-dollar endowments.

Six months into his second term, President Donald Trump has forced
changes at many of the nation’s wealthiest universities, some of which
have shed hundreds of jobs amid federal funding issues and investigations.

While sector layoffs are so frequent that /Inside Higher Ed/ has
dedicated monthly coverage to rounding up such reductions, those actions
are more common at small, cash-strapped colleges or state institutions
reeling from budget cuts. But universities with multibillion-dollar
endowments have been among those making the deepest cuts in the first
half of 2025, often driven by freezes on federal funding that the Trump
administration imposed with minimal notice.

Some universities have also cited the recently passed endowment tax
increase as a factor in layoffs.

Altogether the layoffs show a sector bracing for a new reality where
research funding can be suddenly yanked away with little to no
explanation and international and graduate student enrollment, once
considered a cash cow, is under threat—prompting institutions in even
the highest financial stratosphere to cut costs as they navigate
changing policies and a president sharply critical of the sector.

Here’s a look at how the nation’s wealthiest universities are adjusting
staffing levels due to an uncertain federal policy environment, research
funding issues and a flurry of legal actions from the Trump
administration that have forced concessions from multiple well-resourced
institutions.


    Thousands Out at Johns Hopkins

The Trump administration’s cuts to the U.S. Agency for International
Development hit Johns Hopkins University with $800 million in canceled
funding prompting the Baltimore-based institution to shut down
numerous international programs and lay off 2,222 employees earlier
this year.

The 2,222 job cuts are the deepest announced at any institution this year.

The layoffs, announced in March span more than 40 countries. Of the
jobs cut, 1,975 were located internationally, while another 247 were
in the U.S., with the majority in Baltimore. JHU announced at the time
that another 107 employees would be furloughed.

Johns Hopkins has an endowment recently valued at more than $13
billion.


    Hundreds of Buyouts at Duke

Duke University, which has an endowment recently valued at nearly $12
billion, made some of the deepest cuts of the year so far when
officials announced in July that 599 employees had accepted
buyouts. Another 250 faculty members are reportedly weighing buyout
offers as well.

Following the first round of buyouts, university officials said layoffs
will begin this month.

Duke officials announced the buyouts before the Trump administration
froze $108 million in federal grants and contracts and opened
investigations into alleged racial discrimination, accusing the
university of emphasizing diversity over merit in hiring, admissions
and other practices.

   Deep Cuts at Northwestern

Earlier this year, the Trump administration abruptly froze $790
million in research funding for Northwestern University, reportedly
with no explanation. That action occurred at about the same time that
the federal government opened an investigation into alleged
antisemitism on campus.

Northwestern, which has an endowment valued at more than $14 billion,
responded by eliminating 425 jobs last month in an effort to shave 5
percent off of its staff budget. The move was preceded by a hiring
freeze and other cost-cutting measures announced earlier this year.

President Michael Schill and other administrators wrote in a message
to campus that the cuts were “in response to more than just the
federal research funding freeze.” They also pointed to “rapidly rising
healthcare expenses, litigation, labor contracts, employee benefits,
compliance requirements and a suite of federal changes” that may harm
international student enrollment.


    The Ax Falls at Stanford

Stanford University plans to cut 363 jobs beginning this fall as part
of an effort to shave $140 million off the general funds budget due to
financial issues connected to federal policy changes.

Those cuts come after the university announced a hiring freeze
in February.

Stanford has the fourth-largest endowment among U.S. universities,
recently valued at $37.6 billion. But despite its deep pockets, the
private research university is feeling the squeeze from the Trump
administration, with officials writing in a state regulatory filing
that the university anticipates “reductions in federal research
funding” and an increase in endowment taxes.

Additionally, the U.S. Department of Justice launched an investigation
into admissions practices at Stanford earlier this year, accusing the
university of sidestepping a ban on affirmative action.


    Nearly 180 Layoffs at Columbia

Few institutions have faced as much scrutiny from the federal
government in recent years as Columbia University, which agreed to
sweeping changes and yielded to demands from the Trump administration
to overhaul admissions, disciplinary processes and academic
programs. The university will also share admissions data and reduce
the number of international students it accepts in an unprecedented
agreement with the Trump administration that culminated in a $221
million settlement over allegations of antisemitism tied to
pro-Palestinian campus protests.

Although the Trump administration will release some frozen research
funds as a condition of the settlement, choking off federal dollars
has already prompted cuts. Columbia announced in May that the
university had laid off nearly 180 researchers amid its standoff with
the federal government.

Columbia’s endowment was recently valued at $14.7 billion.


    ‘A Day of Loss’ at Boston U

Boston University announced plans last month to lay off 120 workers and
eliminate another 120 vacant jobs.

Officials wrote in a letter to campus that “recent and ongoing federal
actions and funding cuts are affecting our research enterprise as well
as day-to-day operations” and creating “uncertainty” as BU grapples
with inflation, declining graduate enrollment and other challenges.

“This is a day of loss for all of us,” officials wrote. “There is no way
around this. We know our community may need time to adjust to these
difficult changes. Yet, it is also a necessary step in ensuring our future.”

BU’s endowment is valued at more than $3 billion.


    Dozens Laid Off at USC

The University of Southern California cut 55 jobs last month, according
to a state regulatory filing.

Officials announced in mid-July that layoffs were underway, though they
did not specify the number of employees affected. USC also implemented a
hiring freeze, halted merit-based pay raises, ended some vendor
contracts and pulled back on discretionary spending and travel.

Interim president Beong-Soo Kim called the layoffs “painful” in a
message to campus. He cited various financial concerns, including
“significant shifts in federal support for our research, hospitals,
and student financial aid” as well as potential declines in
international enrollment.

“The ultimate impact of these changes is difficult to predict, but for a
university of our scale, the potential annual revenue loss in federally
sponsored research funding alone could be $300 million or more,” Kim
wrote, adding these changes came on top of a pre-existing budget deficit.

USC’s endowment was recently valued at $8.1 billion.


    Unspecified Cuts at Harvard

Harvard University, which is currently locked in a legal battle with
the Trump administration over alleged antisemitism and other
accusations, has also laid off employees this year. /Harvard Magazine/
reports
<https://www.harvardmagazine.com/2025/07/harvard-layoffs-across-university-schools>
that multiple schools have reduced staff as a result of having federal
research funds frozen.

However, Harvard has not released numbers and declined to provide an
estimate to /Inside Higher Ed/. Union officials have said
<https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2025/4/22/huctw-open-letter-funds/>
that layoffs could add up to hundreds of workers.

Harvard is the nation’s wealthiest university, with an endowment valued
at nearly $52 billion.


    Likely Layoffs at Brown

Following Columbia, Brown University struck a deal with the Trump
administration last month, agreeing to certain changes in order to
restore around $510 million in frozen research funding.

The federal government closed investigations into alleged antisemitism
as part of the settlement. Brown also agreed to put $50 million over
the course of a decade into workforce development in Rhode
Island. Less than a week after the settlement, Brown officials
announced that “some layoffs will be necessary” due to the “persisting
financial impact of federal actions.”

Brown also enacted a hiring freeze in March, and nearly 350 jobs remain
unfilled.

University officials wrote that they expected a $30 million hit to the
2026 fiscal year budget from the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, Trump’s
far-reaching legislation that affected the sector in various ways,
including increases to endowment taxes and limiting or eliminating some
loan programs.

Brown’s endowment was recently valued at $7.2 billion, the lowest
among its Ivy League peers.


8/11/25:  FYI

TRUMP GIVES GRANTMAKING AUTHORITY TO POLITICAL APPOINTEES

President Donald Trump signed an executive order
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] last week to give political appointees
power over grantmaking decisions, specifying that each agency must
have one or more senior appointees or their designees review and
approve funding opportunities and grants. Agencies may use peer review
methods for grantmaking on an advisory basis, but these
recommendations should not be “ministerially ratified, routinely
deferred to, or otherwise treated as de facto binding,” the order
adds. As part of the justification for increasing political oversight
over grant review, the order claims the National Science Foundation
has funded grants that “promoted Marxism, class warfare propaganda,
and other anti-American ideologies,” alluding to a review of NSF
grants published [aip.us17.list-manage.com] by Senate Commerce
Committee Chair Ted Cruz (R-TX) in 2024.

The order requires all grant awards to “demonstrably advance the
president’s policy priorities” where applicable and prohibits them
from supporting “forms of racial discrimination by the grant
recipient” including the use of race as a selection criterion for
employment or program participation, “denial by the grant recipient of
the sex binary in humans,” and other initiatives that “promote
anti-American values.”  The order also directs appointees to give
preference to institutions with lower indirect cost rates and directs
the Office of Management and Budget to limit the use of grant funds
for indirect costs. It adds that appointees should give grants to “a
broad range of recipients” instead of “repeat players,” and ensure
grantee institutions comply with the earlier “gold standard science”
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] executive order.

House Science Committee Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren (D-CA) derided
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] the order, pointing out that political
appointees may have conflicts of interest. “This means someone who has
made millions lobbying for chemical companies could block research
into the dangers of pesticides, PFAS, microplastics — the list goes
on,” Lofgren stated. COGR, a consortium that represents research
institutions, also criticized the order. COGR President Matt Owens
said [aip.us17.list-manage.com] the peer review process, sheltered
from political appointees, is “a key reason U.S. science and
innovation are the envy of the world.”  Owens added that by seeking to
further cap grant funds for indirect costs, “the administration
refuses to acknowledge and pay for the true costs of research critical
to the security of the nation and the health of its people.”

GAO CONCLUDES NIH HAS ILLEGALLY SLOWED SPENDING

The National Institutes of Health’s grant terminations and pause on
grant reviews violate impoundment law, as they coincide with a decline
in grantmaking from February to June with no indication that the funds
are being used for another congressionally mandated purpose, according
to a decision [aip.us17.list-manage.com] issued last week by the
Government Accountability Office. Between February and June of 2025,
NIH awarded $8 billion less than in the same period last year,
according to GAO. The Department of Health and Human Services has
shown “no sufficient justification” for its earlier pause on grant
review meeting notice submissions in the federal register, the GAO
report states. It adds that if the administration pursues deferrals or
rescissions of funds, it must send a message to Congress outlining the
amounts in question and the reasons for the impoundment. In a press
release [aip.us17.list-manage.com] about the report, Senate
Appropriations Committee Ranking Member Patty Murray (D-WA) also noted
that the administration initially cut off [aip.us17.list-manage.com]
an additional $15 billion in NIH funding last week before quickly
reversing the decision. GAO’s role is to support Congress and its
decisions do not have any legal binding on their own.

Meanwhile, the Trump administration has asked the Supreme Court to
overturn the lower court ruling that restored around 900 NIH
grants. Higher education associations filed [aip.us17.list-manage.com]
an amicus brief opposing the administration’s efforts. The court’s
emergency docket decision could come at any time.


* The Trump administration has proposed [aip.us17.list-manage.com]
    that UCLA pay a $1 billion settlement to restore almost $600
    million [aip.us17.list-manage.com] in grant funding frozen by the
    administration. Meanwhile, a judge has ordered NSF to justify
    [aip.us17.list-manage.com] its freezing of 300 grants that were
    awarded to UCLA given that the move conflicts with a June court
    order [aip.us17.list-manage.com] that restored terminated grants
    to California faculty.


8/12/25: Price of oil: WTI is around $62/bbl.  Price is low enough to
    discourage production.  Decline is partly related to lower demand
    because of higher US tariffs leading to reduced economic activity
    and fear of a recession.  Oil companies have no interest in producing
    oil at low prices.


8/12/25: WP.  Jay Bhattacharya: Why the NIH is pivoting away from mRNA
  vaccines / As a vaccine for broad public use, mRNA technology has
  failed to earn the public’s trust.

...The mRNA platform is promising technology. I do not dispute its
potential. In the future, it may yet deliver breakthroughs in treating
diseases such as cancer, and HHS is continuing to invest in ongoing
research on applications in oncology and other complex diseases. But
as a vaccine intended for broad public use, especially during a public
health emergency, the platform has failed a crucial test: earning
public trust. No matter how elegant the science, a platform that lacks
credibility among the people it seeks to protect cannot fulfill its
public health mission...

...Unfortunately, the Biden administration did not manage public trust
in the coronavirus vaccines, largely because it chose a strategy of
mandates rather than a risk-based approach and did not properly
acknowledge Americans’ growing concerns regarding safety and
effectiveness.  ...The failure was thus not a communications
problem. It is a trust problem due to the Biden administration’s
scientific overreach, public pressure and, frankly, arrogance.

...I am not here to litigate the past. I am here to chart a better
path forward. That is why the NIH, under the leadership of HHS
Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr., is investing in new vaccine
technologies — based on whole-virus inactivated vaccines, which offer
a broader immune response and have a longer track record of safety and
public acceptance. We are continuing the Operation Warp Speed model of
investing in technology with the most potential to help Americans.


Comments...

Orwellian double-speak that will kill Americans. 

The conservative ideologues have taken over thanks to the rich
oligarchs who don't want to be taxed or regulated ever again. They are
anti-science and full to the brim with hatred, vitriol and vengeance
toward the strawman liberal manufactured by right-wing mass
media. Money and and power corrupts without ethics or morals. This
kind of ignorance leads to nowhere good very quickly.

He almost had me going, until he got to the part about blaming the
Biden administration for the Republicans who criticized the vaccine,
relying upon rhetoric, not science, to make scientific decisions. Is
there anybody competent there?

This guy is blaming the public's lack of trust, when he should be
blaming those who misinform the public. A deteriorating lack of
general education and the proliferation of MISinformation ensure that
trust in science-based information will be increasingly difficult to
achieve. Add RFK to the brew and Americans will eventually lose access
to vaccines we've relied on to keep us healthy. If "the public"
chooses to listen only to news outlets peddling junk science and
medical conspiracy...

Was a mandate necessary to break the pandemic? We don't know, but we
certainly gave ourselves a better chance because more people got the
initial vaccine. Those people who believe that was somehow an
infringement of their rights to be an individual don't understand the
basic principle of public health: We are all in this together and
requiring certain basic health conditions has improved humanity's
position. That certainly deserves some respect in the author's point
of view.

   Mandate or no mandate, you don’t cancel research because a portion
   of the population has been hoodwinked by anti vaccination pundits
   raising money and their profiles off of misinformation.

   The mRNA vaccine could have created unknown proteins or prions that
   could cause permanent damage to everyone that took the shot or it
   could have saved millions of lives. There is no way to know and
   forcing individuals into a trial is unethical.

      Nonsense. Of course there is a way to know. It’s called
      science. The underlying science that gave us mRNA vaccines
      didn’t just come out of nowhere in 2020/21. They have been
      researched for years.
 
      More MAGA propaganda. The use of the mRNA vehicle has been under
      development for over 30 years and it was under human trials for
      12 years. No prions (which would be impossible to come from
      mRNA), and no harmful proteins were ever associated with the
      mRNA vaccines. 
 
      Individuals weren't "forced into a trial." All the Covid
      vaccines went through three-phase clinical trials before being
      released for use, just like any other drug or vaccine. Yes,
      there's a way to know - and it's not a bunch of clueless people
      telling each other lies about vaccines, it's scientific
      research.

      Billions took it. The trial is long over, it works.

      PhD biochemist here. Explain to me how the vaccine could create
      prions. You’re using terms to scare people you don’t understand
      them.

The goal of the NIH is to conduct and support medical research to
improve health, lengthen life, and reduce illness and
disability. Where in this article is this part of the conversation?
Popular opinion about science is not part of the scientific method. If
people choose to ignore medical advice, so be it. We've already seen
what that does to measels. Keep going along this path and we will find
ourselves 100 years behind the science. Oh, I miss the good old days
of cholera and typhus. I haven't missed a COVID vaccination yet and am
happy to report that I've never had it. (that I know of) . My
grandchildren go to a school where vaccines are mandated. No sign of
whooping cough there. So many reasons to be happy to be living in the
21st century. Let's pray that this administration doesn't send us
further backwards in time.

Doctors and health agencies have long promoted vaccinations against
deadly diseases without knowing the details of how they work. The mRNA
vaccines are better understood than any of their predessors were when
they were first introduced. This type of vaccine doesn't require
massive quantities of chicken eggs to make sufficient quantities of
vaccine, and the components can easily be adjusted for new
strains. This would make it ideal to replace the flu vaccine which
needs to be planned and manufactured long before we are certain of the
strains that will be circulating in North America during flu
season. My friend who has a sensitivity to eggs can't have current flu
vaccines without her entire arm swelling up with accompanying pain and
days of disability. She's not alone. The actual data from rollout of
the Covid mRNA vaccines conclusively demonstrates their effectiveness
and safety. It's unconscionable for the US to end research funding for
mRNA vaccines while saying that we don't have enough information on
how they work. Political rhetoric should not trump scientific inquiry,
but here we are. When there is another pandemic, traditional vaccines
won't provide the fast turnaround needed to prevent huge mortality
rates. Let's just pray that there's not a Republican administration in
power when that happens, because they prefer to rely on hopes and
prayers instead of actual prevention and scientific evidence.

The Trumpers, MAGA mavens, and Republicans in general, trashed the
COVID vaccines relentlessly. Then they turn around and dismiss the
technology that produced the vaccine by saying the vaccines failed to
earn the trust of the public.  What hypocrisy!! What rubbish! The
problem is that their actions endanger all of us. Just wait until the
next pandemic arrives, and we needlessly have to wait 4 to 5 years for
effective vaccines to be developed.

    Stream of unconsciousness from the current potus about internal
    bleach use began april 2020. They funded the moonshot to get the
    vaccines ready, but undermined public health from January 2020 on.

I'm an 81 year old man so am at high risk from a respiratory disease
like COVID. I have kept up with the shots and boosters and have had no
adverse effects from them. I tried for years to avoid catching COVID
but finally got it last December. Turns out all I had was a mild cough
and it went away in about a week presumably thanks to the
vaccinations. Thank goodness M. Battacharya hasn't been running
things. It makes me wonder what happens next, though.

The sad truth is that all the damage and loss we have sustained from
these criminals will continue for many years, if not decades. Not only
in the sciences, but in all areas of life. All sane people recognize
that this debacle will be reversed eventually. I am sorry that my
elderly parents will not live to see the course correction, nor will I
most probably. I hope my children see the time when we return to some
semblance of rationality, but even that is now questionable.

I review scientific studies as a chair of a large Institutional Review
Board. During Covid, this included vigorous, double blinded studies
involving vaccines, as well as ivermectin and hydroxychloroquine. The
mRNA Covid vaccine was an objectively massive success, helping prevent
deaths and suffering. The alternative medicines did not. The messaging
certainly could have been better and trust was clearly undermined by
the current administration. I do not understand why political talking
points should dictate scientific research and policy.

Trust was eroded? Let’s be clear - people who listened to conspiracy
theorists and snake oil salesmen like RFK Jr may have their trust
eroded. Not scientists, doctors, or anyone who reads credible news.

Bhattacharya has been a political hack and continues to be a political
hack. It's the only reason he's heading the NIH now, because the
majority of scientists and particularly physician-scientists think
he's toxic, together with his allies Prasad, Atlas, etc. Just remember
he's the one that wanted the virus to rip. He'll deny it, paint
another picture, and claim he was always right & he wanted to protect
the elderly. 

    [cont] The problem with his rebuttal, now and then, is he had no
    answer how to protect elderly living with younger people. He had
    talking points, but the fact was that there was little hope to
    adopt those kinds of preventions. Instead, he gave the go-ahead
    for the right-wingers and people shouting FREEDOM to ignore safety
    protocols. 

    [cont] The result was the USA had among the worst results of any
    major industrialized county. And if we had listened to
    Bhattacharya and his self-righteous freedom fighters, it would
    have been A LOT WORSE since they were calling on limited
    restrictions well before the vaccine was available. I'm a
    physician-scientist and I think "Dr B" has a fan base similar to
    Trump. He's definitely not the worst of Prasad, Atlas, and those
    who pretend they got it right, but only under the anti-science
    Trump would he be head of NIH. When we vote Trump out, we'll get
    rid of him too.

    [JB was a leader of the group that wrote the Great Barrington
    Declaration arguing that the best approach to the pandemic was to
    achieve herd immunity ASAP by letting it spread.  Of course, herd
    immunity requires something like >80% exposure of the population
    to the disease or a vaccine.  The argument shortchanged the
    well being of huge cross-sections of the populations -- especially
    elderly and those with pre-existing respiratory disease.  At the
    time, there was no good evidence regarding the susceptibility of
    children and infants to COVID-19.  It later emerged that they were
    less susceptible than adults...which has been used by vaccine
    skeptics as evidence of governmental overreach -- but caution was
    the correct approach at the time.  ]

A lot of people tried to explain vaccine efficacy and response, didn't
have the background to do so, and provided their own misinformation as
well, but the degree of damage they did was considerably less than
Bhattacharya, et. al. Further, the efficacy rate for preventing
infection did approach the mid-to-high 90% rate for the initial
vaccine against the first two strains of virus we saw, and modeling I
did at the time suggested that, with another 4-6 weeks of social
isolation and vaccine rates >95%, we could well have reduced the
incidence of COVID-19 disease in the US to background levels. But it
wouldn't have lasted.

   [cont] 1. Trump and his stooges undermined rapid vaccine uptake
   intentionally, Include Vinay Prasad, Bhattacharya, Atlas, Makary,
   and a host of others playing that game, and because of their
   credentials, provided cover to the false statements they were
   making.

   [cont] 2. We lacked world-wide distribution, and the number of
   doses required, to vaccinate virtually the entire world in a timely
   manner. Thus we'd see viral evolutionary drift and another strain
   would sneak into the country and we'd have yet another novel
   coronavirus to deal with, That one, however, likely would have seen
   reduced morbidity and mortality because, had we hit that 95% mark
   for vaccinations, there would have been sufficient immune memory to
   see the invading virus and produce antibodies that were at least
   somewhat effective.

This Trump appointee heading up NIH is responsible for fueling the
misinformation he now criticizes. In 2020, early in the onslaught of
coronavirus Jay penned an op-ed for the Wall Street Journal titled:
"Is the Coronavirus as Deadly as They Say?….. the title alone stirs
distrust and confusion. Yes Jay ….. the virus is as deadly and
subsequently killed over a million Americans. The cult of MAGA is
responsible for mRNA vaccine distrust and thankfully MAGA doesn’t come
close to representing 50% of American thought. Continue on Jay …..you
and “Dr.” Ladapo here in Florida are minority thinkers in the
scientific community. Best not write any more op-eds and embarrass
yourself and the highly qualified scientific community at NIH.

the same people who spread misinformation about it are now citing the
confusion they created as a reason to block public access to mRNA
vaccines rather than trying to correct the public's misperceptions.

Dr. Bhattacharya (who did not pursue residency training and does not
clinically see patients) is off base. He is not referencing any of the
data from when these vaccines rolled out late 2020/early 2021 in which
there was drastic reduction in hospitalization and mortality
associated with COVID. In reviewing his history, he has been on the
wrong side of this issue from the beginning and his article reflects
his own opinions, which are not founded on an evidence based
approach. As a practicing internist/hospitalist, I am thankful for
these vaccines, continue to recommend them to my high risk patients,
continue to receive them for myself and family annually and am hopeful
for mRNA technology during future pandemics. This article needs to be
better fact checked and he should attempt to publish in a
peer-reviewed journal.

   There is a reason why this guy would never get an article
   published in a peer reviewed journal. I hesitate to call him
   doctor since his piece was so political. Trump good, Biden
   bad. Yeah, we get it.

Installing totally unqualified people is one of the hallmarks of
authoritarian governments, according to a piece I read recently about
Hannah Arendt's writing on the topic. We think it's a bug, but for
maga it's a feature: those people will remain loyal no matter what
because they only have their positions for that reason.

[JB got a BA and MA in economics; an MD in 1997; a PhD in economics
in 2000.  Evidently never practiced medicine; likely did not have
an internship.]  

This frightens me. I accept that some people for whatever reason don’t
want to have a vaccine, but I do. And I want a vaccine that will be
effective and the mRNA vaccines have met that test. Why are you trying
to deny the public effective therapies?

As an infectious disease physician, I cannot believe what I am
reading. Dr. Bhattacharya asserts that the vaccine "lost credibility,"
which is a completely non-scientific assertion. THE REASON IT LOST
CREDIBILITY IS NOT DUE TO THE ACTUAL PERFORMANCE OF THE VACCINE
ITSELF, WHICH IN MY OBSERVATION WAS EXEMPLARY, BUT PRIMARILY DUE TO A
VIRULENT ATTACK CAMPAIGN BY RABID ANTI-VAXXERS AND POLITICAL
EXTREMISTS WITH AN AGENDA. This is a revolutionary technology, and in
my opinion the rapid rollout of the COVID vaccine was about the only
worthy thing to come out of the Trump administration. The best way I
can illustrate my point is the fact that I COULD PREDICT WITH A GREAT
DEGREE OF ACCURACY WHETHER MY COVID PATIENTS WOULD LIVE OR DIE BASED
ON THEIR VOTING HISTORY, AND CONSEQUENTLY WHETHER THEY TOOK THE
VACCINE.

    Why did I have to read this far to see someone make this point?
    You are exactly correct, sir. IT'S PURE NIHILISM TO SPREAD
    MISTRUST AND THEN ACT LIKE AN INNOCENT OBSERVER LATER ON.

    If an opinion piece could be called malpractice this one is it. 

    This very newspaper, before it became Pravda for MAGA, published
    data weekly showing rates of hospitalization and death by
    vaccination rates state by state. Now it publishes disinformation
    under the guise of "opinion".


as a reputable public health scientist I'm sure you also know that
vaccinating lower risk populations protects those at higher risk by
decreasing the chance of exposure. I would posit that decreasing
the risk to the elderly as well as younger people who for whatever
reason are more susceptible is a desirable aim for a public health
innovation.

mRNA vaccines are revolutionary period hard stop. THE EXPECTATION OF
BEING TOTALLY PROTECTED WITH VACCINATION WAS FALSE AND IT WAS NOT
COMMUNICATED. The deficiency and the horrible politics due mostly to
the antivaxers and trumpers poisoned the well. Good science is just
that, it is good science and communication of the data is lacking for
this virus. Good communication has now been muzzled by this trump
administration and kennedy jr. We, collectively will pay the price.

thanks in part to fringe conspiracy theorists like Dr. Bhattacharya
and Mr. Kennedy himself, some people demanded to participate in the
workplace unvaccinated despite an increased risk of contracting and
passing on the virus to their coworkers and further straining
overburdened hospitals. Now Dr. Bhattacharya uses that manufactured
controversy to justify canceling the scientific work underlying the
medical breakthrough that saved those lives and holds great promise
for combating other emerging and existing diseases. What a tragic
abdication of responsibility by those charged with safeguarding our
health.

I respectfully disagree! The mRNA vaccine won the trust of a vast
majority of well educated Americans.

     He has earned the trust of uninformed Americans.

Why are people not getting the Covid vaccine in 2024? Perhaps because
the vaccine was so successful that Covid now has a very low
incidence. People may be making a rational decision about how to use
their time that has nothing to do with vaccine hesitancy or
communications in the Biden administration...IF ANYONE IS PROMOTING
VACCINE HESITANCY IT IS THE DOCTOR, THE HHS SECRETARY AND THIS WHOLE
ADMINISTRATION THAT SEEMS TO HAVE A VERY STRANGE RELATIONSHIP WITH
FACTS, RATIONAL ANALYSIS AND THE TRUTH.

This really is NOT good enough for government work.

In an emergency we have to follow some orders even if we personally
think another option is better. You don't argue with the firefighter
getting you out of the burning building!

I am a scientist and actively work in clinical trials. Dr. Battacharya
is very, very wrong, and has sullied his reputation beyond repair
among those of us who are *REAL* scientists, with lab and clinical
experience, not just armchair medical quarterbacks. First, do no harm
seems to be way over his head, despite his previous appointment at
Stanford.

If we doubted his qualifications to lead NIH before this ignorant
opinion piece confirms it.

Your article is political & bunk: I studied the mRNA scientific
research for weeks before I went to get the COVID. This was after I
nearly died getting it in Dec of 2021, before it was known what it
was. I almost died from a second bout before I could get the
vaccine. I was getting the Long Haul symptoms, becoming more
debilitated at 75 years old. But, as soon as I got the vaccine my
health began to improve. I've had the updated version every 6 to 9
months since the first shot and my health is as good as it's ever
been. The scientific breakthrough of the mRNA is astounding, one of
the best scientific accomplishments in my lifetime. My long haul
symptoms have reversed and I haven't gotten ill from RSV or any other
bug. The choices you all are making in the current administration is
setting us back, not moving us forward. Another sad choice in the
issues of power.

Obviously, the goal should be to be effective. While it would be nice
to earn public trust, that can't be a primary goal particularly when
health issues become polticized.

Because a small segment of the population does not believe in science,
the majority is barred from the benefits of basic research?

Very excited about the impact a non-practicing Doctor and an
environmental lawyer are having on public health as we usher in a new
Age of Enlightenment.

If one of the arguments is the lack of public trust because of poor
messaging from the former administration then the current
administration needs to do better in this area not cancel research.

This article is the old "we aren't sure about smoking and cancer"
routine. You put a lot of misinformation out there, and then question
whether there is trust.

This is a very misguided article in my view. The lack of trust was
mainly due to the misinformation that was spreading on line -- faster
than viral infection rates. Moreover, many politicians- mostly from
the Republican party, and amplified further by Fox News, cast serious
doubt on the vaccines. The Biden administration- from all I observed
tried desperately hard to counter these aspersions. The author
inadvertently, makes the case that the mRNA - platform needs even more
research - and he is in a position to help build the public
trust. This article shows his true bias. and that is very
unfortunate. I see the USA marching backwards in all areas of science
- health, environmental, and energy transformation. It is sad to
observe when we so badly need evidence based decision making.

Bhattacharya was never a practising MD. He has an MD degree, but
graduate work was in economics and HIS EMPLOYMENT WAS AS A MEDICAL
ECONOMIST AT THE CONSERVATIVE HOOVER THINK TANK housed at
Stanford. During the pandemic HE OPINED THAT 20,000 TO 40,000
INDIVIDUALS WOULD DIE in the US from COVID. This was based on his own
understanding of the disease from a seroprevalence study he did in
Santa Clara County, CA. This study was strongly criticized at the time
for its design flaws. He was very wrong about mortality from COVID and
I am not aware that he has ever addressed his widely inaccurate
estimate. We are now at 1,225,000 million deaths and counting. If we
had followed his recommendations, this number would undoubtedly be
much higher. This individual should have little role to play in making
important and strategic decisions to protect the health of Americans,
although he is clearly a wingman for RFK Jr.

The reason that mass media didn’t report GBS [Giulian Barre syndrome]
as a side effect of the RSV vaccine was because it wasn’t anything
special. GBS can occur at anytime after a viral infection and
incidents of GBS after the RSV vaccine are 10 times lower than
incidents of GBS after infection of the RSV virus itself.  Incidents
of GBS are very very rare after vaccination and are more likely to be
less common and less severe than being infected by the virus
itself. Want to reduce your chances of severe GBS? Get vaccinated !

     While serious and requiring immediate medical attention, most
     people with GBS recover fully or with minor residual
     effects. Unfortunately, the million people who died from the virus
     did not recover.

The facts: Operation Warp Speed did not produce the highly effective
original COVID 19 mRNA vaccine in record time. Pfizer did., and they
did it without accepting any money from the federal government for
R&D. They gambled $9 billion of their own resources. Had the original
Phase III trial for their vaccine not proved at least 50% effective in
protecting against serous illness, they would have received nothing
from Operation Warp Speed. Also, even after the trial demonstrated an
astonishing 95% efficacy, Trump's HHS only ordered 100 million doses,
far short of the 200 million public health officials thought would be
necessary. The US averted a severe shortage only because Pfizer
figured out how to produce far more doses than originally planned. The
current NIH Director would do well to read one of the best books on
medical discovery ever...Dr. Albert Burla's "Moonshot" about how the
vaccine was developed. The other thing about the NIH Director's Op Ed
that is so disturbing is that he is arguing that NIH grants for mRNA
research in vaccines should be curtailed (stopped?) because the public
has lost confidence in the technology. Well, WHY IS THAT? They've lost
confidence because of the gross misinformation being promulgated
by...well, we all know who.

  [One of the several errors in Bhattacharya's argument is the claim
  the anti-vaxxers object to the mRNA-developed vaccines.  The
  overwhelming majority of those people don't know mRNA from a hot
  rock.  They aren't suspicious of the technique used to produce the
  vaccine, they are suspicious because they think it was developed by
  the GOVERNMENT and then ostensibly foisted on the naive American
  people.  Any other type of vaccine would have generated the same
  irrational anti-government backlash. ]


8/13/25: IHE.  Trump Order on Grants Puts Politics Above Peer Review,
  Researchers Say / The executive order says senior appointees must
  review grants, and it demands awards be easier to
  terminate. Research groups say it undermines science.

Since Inauguration Day, the Trump administration has repeatedly frozen
and terminated research funding for seemingly political
reasons. Federal agencies have ended grants for studies because they
allegedly advanced diversity, equity and inclusion or “gender
ideology,” and they’ve cut off research dollars across the board for
some universities to pressure them to crack down on pro-Palestine
advocacy and bar transgender women from women’s sports.

But, late last week, the president laid out new processes for how he
wants “senior appointees” to take charge of awarding, or denying, new
federal grants. He also ordered that they regularly review grants that
have already been awarded—and consider terminating them.

The executive order, in one sense, puts into writing the
administration’s ongoing efforts to assert greater control over who
receives grants and for what kinds of research. But researchers and
those who advocate for them and their institutions also say some
aspects of the order escalate this campaign. Moreover, they say the
political review threatens to further slow the flow of federal
research funding over all.

“The [order] would add a new and unnecessary layer of bureaucracy that
will diminish the role of quality and excellence in science while
simultaneously adding delay to the process of evaluating and awarding
grant proposals,” Barbara R. Snyder, president of the Association of
American Universities, said in a statement Tuesday. She said it “will
apparently replace the merit-based system of science-based
decision-making for research grant funding in favor of decision-making
by political appointees.”

Debbie Altenburg, vice president for research policy and advocacy at the
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities, said, among the other
provisions, “certainly, adding a term and condition to grants for
cancellation for convenience is a significant change.”

President Trump’s executive order further prohibits federal officials
from awarding discretionary grants that fund or “promote” specific
purposes that conservatives have railed against: illegal immigration,
racial preferences, “intentional proxies for race” and “the notion
that sex is a chosen or mutable characteristic.” It criticized past
federal funding of “drag shows in Ecuador,”
“transgender-sexual-education programs” and critical race theory
training, though the White House didn’t provide /Inside Higher Ed/
examples of this.

But the order doesn’t just aim at specific targets of the right. It uses
broad language to ban funding for initiatives that “promote
anti-American values,” without defining that. It further requires
discretionary grants to “where applicable, demonstrably advance the
President’s policy priorities,” without defining where that’s applicable.

    This misguided order will slow progress for cures and treatments
    that patients and families across the country urgently need by
    delaying critical research with problematic political and
    bureaucratic hurdles.”

    —Association of American Medical Colleges

And it threatens grant money that’s already been awarded, by ordering
the Office of Management and Budget to ensure future discretionary
grants can be terminated “for convenience.” It further directs other
federal agencies to revise terms for existing grants “to permit
immediate termination for convenience.”

In multiple places, the order urges the senior appointees at
grant-making agencies to question peer reviewers’ assessment of who
deserves funding.

“Senior appointees and their designees shall not ministerially ratify or
routinely defer to the recommendations of others in reviewing funding
opportunity announcements or discretionary awards, but shall instead use
their independent judgment,” the order says, adding later that
peer-review recommendations must “remain advisory.”


    ‘Bottlenecks’

Backlash to the order was swift as the major research associations and
some individual researchers spoke out against what they called a
usurpation of merit-based review of grant applications. Ultimately,
they said, the order prioritizes politics above peer review, adding
that it will further slow research funding when federal grant making
is already lagging.

The Association of American Medical Colleges said in a statement Friday
that the order “will create significant bureaucratic bottlenecks in the
grant review and approval process, slowing the pace of innovation and
introducing political preferences as part of the approval process.”

“This misguided order will slow progress for cures and treatments that
patients and families across the country urgently need by delaying
critical research with problematic political and bureaucratic hurdles,”
the association said.

Todd Wolfson, president of the American Association of University
Professors, said in a statement, “This order further weakens our
nation’s ability to conduct and support scientific research across
various fields by replacing experts with ideologically driven political
stooges who have no expertise and no business making decisions on
academic research.”

Katie Lotterhos, an associate professor of marine and environmental
sciences at Northeastern University, told /Inside Higher Ed/ that
“political review of grants is definitely going to narrow the kinds of
science that can be done.

“Now scientists not only have to get through that whole gantlet of peer
review and panel review—there’s going to be an additional gantlet of
political review,” Lotterhos said.

Lotterhos also said she thinks the order “just formalizes what we think
is already being done behind the scenes.”

Joanne Padrón Carney, chief government relations officer for the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, told /Inside Higher
Ed /the Trump administration already placed an “additional level of
review” atop peer review in the form of the Department of Government
Efficiency, which led grant-cancellation efforts.

Carney said one could argue that the executive order codifies “steps
the administration has already undertaken” and could give officials
some legal cover. Many of the higher ed–related lawsuits filed
against the administration are challenges of grant cuts. But she said
the order could also establish “a more formalized process that leaves
in question how research proposals based on advancing scientific
ideals will be measured against the administration’s priorities.”

Additionally, it’s “critically important to emphasize that it also
codifies a layer of red tape that is a bottleneck in the execution of
great science and research awards,” Carney said. She and others have
raised concerns that the National Institutes of Health won’t be able to
spend all its allocated grant money before the fiscal year ends next
month—meaning that money will return to the U.S. Treasury.

“It slows down the research process, and it introduces more
uncertainty,” Carney said.

Even for future grants that are awarded and aren’t later officially
rescinded, the order may still stymie researchers’ access to funds. It
says agency heads, to the extent legal and “practicable,” must put terms
into grant agreements banning “recipients from directly drawing down
general grant funds for specific projects without the affirmative
authorization of the agency” and requiring grantees to “provide written
explanations or support, with specificity, for requests for each drawdown.”

    A key reason U.S. science and innovation are the envy of the world
    is our scientific peer-review process that bases funding decisions
    on scientific merit, not political preference and partisanship.”

    —Matt Owens, COGR president

Daniel Aldrich, the Dean’s Professor of Resilience at Northeastern
University, said, “No president has sought to the degree that Trump has
to control what science looks like.” Aldrich said the order replaces
what’s supposed to be an objective and knowledge-based approach to
deciding who gets grants with a partisan one.

“We want scientists to make those decisions,” Aldrich said. “They know
the field best—not a political appointee who is seeking to make the
president look good.”


    ‘National Interest’

Trump’s order directs federal agency heads to designate appointees who
will then create new processes to review already awarded grants and new
funding opportunities. The goal is to ensure consistency “with agency
priorities and the national interest,” the order says. National interest
isn’t defined.

These appointees or their designees must approve any announcements of
new funding opportunities. And—before the discretionary grants are
actually handed out—grant-review panels or program offices must discuss
them with these appointees or their designees.

Once the money is out the door, the appointees’ oversight responsibility
still won’t be over. Trump ordered the appointees to annually review
discretionary awards “for consistency with agency priorities and
substantial progress.” The president said this “review shall include an
accountability mechanism for officials responsible for selection and
granting of the awards.”

And, until this process is in place at an agency, the agency “shall not
issue any new funding opportunity announcements without prior approval
from the senior appointee designated … except as required by law,” the
order says.

Lotterhos said “national interest” is “such a vague and subjective
term.” She said the order might result “in grants having to be written
in such a way now that they can pass peer review as well as pass
political review,” like including in a National Science Foundation grant
application a section on how the research would advance national interests.

An NSF spokesperson declined to comment for this story beyond sending a
written statement, which said the agency “is currently reviewing our
processes to ensure we are in compliance with the [order] while
continuing to invest in innovating science and engineering research that
drives American competitiveness.”

Spokespeople for the NIH, the Health and Human Services Department, the
Office of Management and Budget, and the White House didn’t respond to
requests for comment this week.

Matt Owens, president of COGR—an organization that now only goes by its
acronym and that advocates for researchers and universities on the
federal level—said in a statement that the order “sidelines scientific
merit in federal research grant decisions by putting political
appointees and partisans in charge of determining which scientific
research grants should be funded.”

“A key reason U.S. science and innovation are the envy of the world is
our scientific peer-review process that bases funding decisions on
scientific merit, not political preference and partisanship,” Owens said.

And—like the leaders of other research associations—Owens also
criticized another part of the order: It contains another attempt by the
Trump administration to target indirect research costs.


    Scrutiny Again on Indirect Costs

For months, the administration has sought to curb how much money it
spends on costs indirectly related to research, arguing that colleges
are misusing the funds. Reimbursements for indirect costs are supposed
to help universities shoulder expenses that can’t be attributed to any
single research project, such as building maintenance, compliance with
patient safety regulations and more.

Universities negotiate these rates with the federal government, and they
vary. While some institutions have negotiated reimbursement rates higher
than 50 percent, the average is 28 percent.

   [Again, ambiguous.  Believe this is the fraction of the TOTAL
   award devoted to ID costs, not the fraction of the DIRECT costs.]

Under Trump, the NIH, NSF and Departments of Defense and Energy have all
moved to cap indirect costs at 15 percent, but courts have blocked them.
Senate appropriators also rejected that cap in a recent spending bill.
The new executive order doesn’t try again to set that or any maximum
amount, but it does incentivize institutions to ask for lower rates in
order to win grants.

“All else being equal, preference for discretionary awards should be
given to institutions with lower indirect cost rates,” the order says.

Lotterhos said this seems to be one of a couple of good things in the order.

“I think a lot of us would like to see more transparency in indirect
costs,” she said.

The order also calls for limiting “the use of discretionary grant funds
for costs related to facilities and administration,” another term for
indirect costs. But multiple research associations—including some that
have been working as part of the Joint Associations Group to come up
with a new research funding model Congress and the administration will
accept—have objected.

“The administration refuses to acknowledge and pay for the true costs of
research critical to the security of the nation and the health of its
people,” Owens, of COGR, said in the statement. “Facilities and
administrative (or ‘indirect’) costs partially reimburse an
institution’s costs associated with equipment, lab space, utilities,
compliance activities, and other items that are essential to conducting
research and meeting federal requirements. These costs have been capped
since 1991, and this order aims to cap reimbursement for these costs
further.”

The Association of American Medical Colleges said in its statement that
the provision will “weaken the ability of institutions to maintain
essential research infrastructure.”

Heather Pierce, senior director for science policy for the AAMC, noted
that the executive order doesn’t create law. She said people should be
on the lookout for what rules agencies promulgate to comply.

“The key will be what action the agencies take in response to this,”
Pierce said.



8/18/25: FYI.  UCLA Grants Restored, But Future Litigation Faces
Obstacles

A federal judge has ordered [aip.us17.list-manage.com] the National
Science Foundation to restore grants to UCLA for the second time this
year. The judge ruled in June [aip.us17.list-manage.com] that NSF must
restore grants to University of California institutions that were
canceled “for researching blacklisted DEI topics” or “by form letter
without any grant-specific explanation.” NSF restored those grants but
then froze all its grants [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to UCLA in July,
following the Justice Department’s finding that the university
violated antidiscrimination statutes by “creating a hostile
educational environment for Jewish and Israeli students.” The National
Institutes of Health also froze nearly 500 grants to UCLA.  The judge
rejected NSF’s claim [aip.us17.list-manage.com] last week that the
injunction did not apply to grant suspensions, only terminations.

Meanwhile, an appeals court ruled [aip.us17.list-manage.com] last week
that under the Impoundment Control Act, only the Government
Accountability Office can sue the administration over funding cuts,
rather than people affected by the cuts. Multiple lawsuits from
researchers and associations representing them, including the original
lawsuit to restore federal grants to UC schools, have argued that
grant terminations violate the ICA. Plaintiffs in the case said they
would appeal. GAO is an advisory body for Congress and so far has not
sued over the Trump administration’s funding cuts.



8/25/25: FYI.  SUPREME COURT PERMITS TERMINATION OF NIH GRANTS

The Trump administration can re-terminate hundreds of National
Institutes of Health grants following an order
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] from the Supreme Court last week. The court
found that challenges to grant terminations are outside the
jurisdiction of the district court that originally overturned the
terminations. The order is not a final ruling on the terminations, but
requires researchers or their representative organizations to file
suit in the Court of Federal Claims to seek a final decision. Earlier
this month, a federal judge similarly ruled [aip.us17.list-manage.com]
that a suit challenging grant terminations from the National Science
Foundation must instead be brought before the Court of Federal Claims.

However, the Supreme Court did uphold the district court’s decision to
vacate NIH guidance documents that said the agency would no longer
fund research “related to DEI objectives, gender identity, or
COVID-19” nor “continue the practice of awarding grants to researchers
based on race.” Justice Amy Coney Barrett stated in her concurring
opinion that “vacating the guidance does not necessarily void
decisions made under it,” referring to the terminations.

The court voted 5–4 on both decisions. “By today’s order, an evenly
divided court neuters judicial review of grant terminations by sending
plaintiffs on a likely futile, multivenue quest for complete relief,”
Justice Ketanji Brown Jackson wrote in her dissenting opinion.

The district court’s decision in June ordered
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] the restoration of grants for parties
involved in the lawsuits, including individual researchers named in
the suit, members of the American Public Health Association, the
United Auto Workers union, and researchers at public institutions in
the 16 states that sued NIH. Some of those researchers saw their funds
restored [aip.us17.list-manage.com] while others did not;
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] some never had their funding terminated
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] despite being on the Department of Health
and Human Service’s list of cuts. [aip.us17.list-manage.com]

   [Radio commentary (Bloomberg, I believe) states that this decision
   threatens to abrogate the traditional value of government
   contracts.  Grant contracts were broken by Trump admin's actions.
   Casts doubt on desirability of any federal contracts (i.e. in the
   private sector as well as research institutions).  The Federal
   Claims court is normally used only for straightforward matters, not
   for something as complicated as this.  AND, since the grant funds
   were already pulled from the grantees, the process has already
   almost guaranteed that the supported programs have been terminated,
   personnel laid off, and so forth.  TERRIBLE.  ]

HOUSE SCIENCE COMMITTEE LEADER REITERATES SUPPORT FOR ARTEMIS

House Science Committee Chair Brian Babin (R-TX) emphasized his
support for NASA’s Artemis lunar program during a tour
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] of Johnson Space Center last week. “Under
President Trump’s leadership, we are committed to Artemis — landing
U.S. astronauts on the Moon during his term and building a sustained
presence on the lunar surface and in low-Earth orbit,” Babin said in a
press release highlighting the tour. Transportation Secretary Sean
Duffy, who is the acting head of NASA, and Senate Commerce Committee
Chair Ted Cruz (R-TX) also attended the tour. Duffy has said
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] he wants the agency to focus on human
exploration of the Moon and Mars and ditch its other programs,
especially those related to Earth and climate science.

The Trump administration’s 2026 budget request
[aip.us17.list-manage.com] proposes slashing NASA’s overall budget by
$6 billion, roughly a quarter, but also proposes an 8% increase in
funding for human exploration. The House proposal, which Babin led,
proposes an even larger boost to human exploration of 26%, with lesser
but still substantial cuts to other programs adding up to flat funding
for the agency.  The House and the administration recommend cutting
NASA’s Earth science programs by 40% and 53%, respectively. The
equivalent Senate proposal, led by Cruz, recommends flat funding for
most of NASA’s programs, including human exploration and Earth
science. Babin and Cruz have worked together on a number of
NASA-related issues lately, including a push to relocate NASA’s
headquarters [aip.us17.list-manage.com] to their state.


8/25/25: WP.  Harvard’s research is shrinking amid the Trump
  administration’s freeze / The university is at a crossroads as it
  navigates lawsuits and negotiations to try to mitigate the damage to
  research

...The weaponization of federal funding, cast as a necessary step to
end discrimination and antisemitism, is threatening lifesaving
research and forcing agonizing choices. It’s an inflection point for
Harvard, for higher education — and, many argue, for the country — as
the generations-long partnership between the federal government and
research universities totters under the Trump administration.

Harvard sued in federal court, calling the funding cuts
unconstitutional. Both sides have asked for a ruling in the case
without a trial.  Even if the specific grants frozen at Harvard were
suddenly restored, there is deep-rooted uncertainty about the future
of science in the United States. One central question for many
researchers is whether the country’s support for basic science is
ending. For more than 75 years, the federal government has funded
research at universities aimed purely at gaining knowledge — like the
questions Adelman asks about cells.

Companies typically don’t fund that kind of basic science, because
there isn’t an immediate application that would be profitable. But the
discoveries can lead to dramatic advancements in medicine, and
innovations such as cellphones, GPS and MRI machines.

Harvard provided an additional $250 million as bridge funding for its
researchers as its lawsuits challenging the Trump administration’s
actions and talks play out. That money has provided a stopgap.

...But the research enterprise is already shrinking under the Trump
administration’s cuts, and the signs are all over Harvard.  Earlier
this summer, a lab administrator’s desk stood empty, leaving faculty
members to take over those tasks. A taped-up sign in a hallway urged
grad students to ask for help if told to leave their lab, graduate
early or take reduced pay. A postdoc had given up on applying for jobs
related to the expertise he’d just spent a decade earning because he
had to find a way to pay rent.

In July, Harvard’s president, Alan Garber, acknowledged painful
layoffs, confirmed to the campus that a hiring freeze for faculty and
staff would continue, and explained that federal actions could leave a
hole of almost $1 billion a year in the university’s budget.

The government took action against Harvard after the school refused to
agree to Trump’s demands in April, including lodging numerous federal
investigations and threats to block international scholars from
campus. Nearly one thousand grants worth more than $2 billion were
terminated.  Some canceled grants at universities across the country
funded research that touched on political issues such as diversity,
equity and inclusion. But at Harvard, the administration has announced
it will not give any federal research funding, period — for any topic.

A spokesman for the White House, Kush Desai, said the United States is
home to the largest publicly and privately funded ecosystem of
gold-standard research in the world, and that Trump has pledged to
“cement America’s dominance in cutting-edge technologies like AI,
crypto and space exploration while addressing our chronic disease
epidemic.” Desai said the Trump administration “is strengthening this
ecosystem by slashing waste, fraud and abuse in federal research
funding — including on DEI projects that only support ideological
activism” and by cracking down on antisemitism.

...The federal government is hardly the only contributor to research
at Harvard; in 2024, the school funded more than $525 million in
research, and private foundations and industry contributed more than
$300 million. But it is the biggest, providing more than $680 million
in research funding in 2024, according to the university. About 1,800
faculty and staff members are partially or entirely paid by federal
research funding, according to court documents, and about 1,500
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers get financial support
such as stipends.

In a system that accelerated after World War II, researchers at
universities like Harvard have competed for federal grants that
reflect national priorities. Research powers the economy and national
security.

Federal research funding is also used to train scientists at
universities, said Michael Gordin, dean of the college at Princeton
University and a historian of science, in a system that he called
“magically effective” and the envy of the world.  “It takes about a
decade to make a chemist. That’s done in universities,” he said, even
for those going to work for companies. But that formula requires smart
people willing to bet their future on that career path — a bet that
feels increasingly risky now.  “I don’t know where we go from here,”
Gordin said, “if we don’t have that system.”

...People working on research with a political aspect know that
funding can ebb and flow. But there has always been strong bipartisan
support for the kind of work Adelman does.

Until this year.

In May, while away at a scientific conference, she got an email
informing her that her grants were terminated.  A colleague from
Harvard saw her face and asked, “’Did you just get the email, too?’
“We just stood there in the middle of this meeting and hugged and
fought back the tears,” she said.

...If the standoff between Harvard and the Trump administration
continues, researchers will continue to leave. Labs will shut
down. And scientists will scale back their aspirations.

Comments...

I work at Harvard Medical School in a leadership role for a center
that supports and trains future medical researchers. We have been
supporting these early-career professionals for years, struggling to
convince them that the sacrifices they will need to make to embark on
a research career (even part-time) are worth it. Private practice can
pay quite a bit more than a research career, and there's a significant
time investment needed to obtain grants, gain independence, secure
funding, and start a lab. There's no glory in this work; many
researchers who have discovered groundbreaking medicines and devices
are far removed from the limelight. In my many years at the medical
school, I've met the kindest, most down-to-earth physicians and
scientists who are committed to healthcare - and their aspirations to
serve their communities. Now we face even greater impediments to
launch this future workforce. Who will be the scientists who take the
lead on treating and curing diseases we might all face in years to
come?

I spent many years at NIH working with medical post-docs who sought
the extraordinary clinical research training NIH provided, and I know
so many who, bolstered by that experience, are now leaders in their
fields. It is tragic that this extraordinary training, both at NIH and
NIH-supported programs at top-notch universities, is being trashed by
trump and rfk.

If more people understood the role that research conducted at
universities across the country plays in health care and science, they
would be aghast at what is happening to the funding. Anyone who has
received health care of any kind has benefited from that research.
Further, the economic harm that will flow from cutting off so much of
this research is almost unfathomable. It isn't just about these
scientists' jobs. It's about the money spent beyond the universities
that support the local economies: the small businesses that will go
under because they lose a double-digit percentage of their customers;
the loss of home sales and rentals that will distort the local housing
communities, the loss of tax dollars paid into the local governments,
etc..

    Do you have any evidence that backs up your claims? Harvard sits
    in very well off Cambridge, Ma. Harvard is by far the most
    effected University.

       You are wrong. Every university is hit by this
       administration. Science is over in the USA sadly

The rational course of action is not just stopgap funding but
salvaging the research by moving it overseas and finding new sponsors.
... Park funds away of the reach of an extortion autocrat? Yes, this
is a nightmare scenario. There will be no quick reversal.

It sickens me to know babies will die because of trump, right here in
America.

I’m all for federal funding — which is to say my tax dollars - goes to
medical and scientific research. But in the face of the cancellation
of such funding to Harvard, why would not some of its $53 billion
endowment (!!!) not go toward making up for the short gap? What am I
missing here?

   What you are missing is that much of the endowment is targeted to
   other activities, a lot for scholarships, buildings and
   infrastructure, specific research fields, etc. It is not like a
   bank account that you can withdraw $$ and use it as you like.

   Government funding for research is used to support research that
   the government wants to see carried out. Why should any university
   use its endowment (invested to support the long term growth of the
   university), to do the government’s work?  The problem American
   universities face now is a federal government that cannot hold a
   steady course. They’ll respond appropriately - just like American
   corporations - start doing this work overseas.

   You are missing that the funding was given to Harvard by Congress to
   do basic research to help advance medical, physical and biological
   sciences. The return on investment is on the order of 200-300% on
   every dollar spent.  Harvard (or any other university) can’t fund a
   moonshot on their own.
   
   WaPo needs to do a better job of explaining how endowment's
   work. The university doesn't have the legal right to use every
   endowment they receive, in any way that they see fit. Many
   endowments are restricted. They were given on the condition that
   they only be used for specific purposes, and if the endowment is
   intended to provide funding in perpetuity, the principle must
   always remain intact, and only interest or investment income can be
   spent. If the endowment was restricted to a specific field,
   program, research, scholarship, etc., it can't be used for anything
   besides that purpose. Harvard's hands are probably tied regarding
   most of that $54- or $54-billion endowment total.

   When a gift is made to the endowment for a specific purpose, that
   principal isn't spent. It's invested, and the returns on that
   investment are dedicated to fund the specific purpose of the
   gift. Those investment returns remain restricted, and cannot be
   used for other purposes.

   The federal government is not “giving” this money to Harvard or
   other universities. They are in essence investing it with the
   return being discoveries that benefit the country’s citizens many
   time over what the government invests.

Truly amazing how many people were apparently unhappy we had smart people.

High level research requires a complex ecosystem. It requires ultra
sophisticated equipment suppliers, colleagues in adjacent fields of
research, a continuous supply of doctoral and post doctoral fellows,
often even cleaners with carefully developed training. This takes many
decades to evolve. Once it begins to deteriorate it cannot simply be
replaced. This is what is happening now in the US. In the meantime
China is pouring millions of dollars into research. How is this of
benefit to the US?

"Why should we subsidize intellectual curiosity?"-- Ronald Reagan
---And he was dead wrong. Many scientific breakthroughs come about
because an expert or experts in their field do research and say,
"That's funny--I didn't expect that..." In other words, it is a
process of structured serendipity as contrasted with trying to hit the
bullseye on a preconceived target. An example is vulcanized rubber
(used in car tires) where a chemist allegedly spilled sulfur in molten
rubber.  For a scientific ecosystem to be healthy, we need to give the
*experts* what they need to perform the work they love that *might*
have the potential to benefit society, but focus less on some specific
financial "payback". MBAs and risk-analysis freaks don't understand
this, and certainly President Trump knows *nothing* about anything,
except to capitalize on some immediate short-sighted return in terms
of dollars and cents.

The politization of the funding wasn't by Trump, it was the Democrats
pushing diversity agendas into science funding and shutting down
anyone who wanted to oppose it. As well as the political weaponization
vaccines vs Trump for political points. This is the predictible
counter reaction. Harvard chose a "side" and now it is losing.

    Did that make sense to anyone?? “Diversity agendas”?!?

It’s not just Harvard. Medical research is being trashed throughout
the country. It’s a complete disaster.

    It's not just medical research, it's all scientific research. I'm
    an earth scientist (oceanographer) and the cuts in our field are
    devastating as well. Just look at NOAA and NASA, everything from
    NSF....huge cuts everywhere.

The USA, in more rational times, made up for its poor educational
standards by attracting overseas talent, concurrently with high levels
of funding for research.  Pandering via culture wars to the parochial
nature of Americans has abruptly dried up the former and the latter
has wilted under pressure from redirection of funds to billionaires
tax cuts, and also evangelical and MAGA distrust of science and
education.  Science will suffer in the short term but the rest of the
world is sensing an opportunity, and is taking it.

The rigorously competitive NIH and NSF funding for research is the
best hope for future progress. This shouldn't be political. But it
is. All done for cheap points about elitism, coming from
Musk/Trump/Heritage/etc.  Please vote against this self-destructive
foolishness in midterms 2026 and sooner here in VA this November.

Trump is knee-capping our country's ability to compete internationally
and severely undermining national security by interfering with
important research that could help our military.

Basic research is the lifeblood of our economy and our standard of
living. The Trump administration's attack on research, research
institutions, and researchers is demonstrably weakening America by the
day. We are the process of losing our world leadership status in all
important research areas. And at the same time ceding our leadership
to China. All because a thin-skinned, wannabe dictator and his minions
are intimidated by people who are actually a lot smarter than they
are. The destruction being wrought today will take decades to
overcome, even if it is possible to overcome. MAGA, you voted for the
destruction of America!

I have been carrying a sign that says: “Nobody voted to defund cancer
research”.to multiple protests. A man in his 40’s yelled at me during
the last protest and said, I did! Shane on me for thinking nobody with
half a brain would be against funding cancer research.


8/27/25: WP.  White House fires CDC director who says RFK Jr. is
  ‘weaponizing public health’ / Susan Monarez was confirmed as the
  CDC’s director in July. Three top agency officials announced
  resignations as the Trump administration moved to oust her.

The White House on Wednesday fired Susan Monarez as director of the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention after she refused to resign
amid pressure to change vaccine policy, which sparked the resignation
of other senior CDC officials and a showdown over whether she could be
removed.

Hours after the Department of Health and Human Services announced
early Wednesday evening that Monarez was no longer the director, her
lawyers responded with a fiery statement saying she had not resigned
or been fired. They accused HHS Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. of
“weaponizing public health for political gain” and “putting millions
of American lives at risk” by purging health officials from
government.

“When CDC Director Susan Monarez refused to rubber-stamp unscientific,
reckless directives and fire dedicated health experts, she chose
protecting the public over serving a political agenda,” the lawyers,
Mark S. Zaid and Abbe Lowell, wrote in a statement. “For that reason,
she has been targeted.”

Soon after their statement, the White House formally fired Monarez.

...Wednesday’s shake-ups — which include the resignation of the agency’s
chief medical officer, the director of its infectious-disease center
and other key officials — add to the tumult at the nation’s premier
public health agency.

..,.Monarez, who was confirmed in late July, was pressed for days by
Kennedy, administration lawyers and other officials over whether she
would support rescinding certain approvals for coronavirus vaccines,
according to two people with knowledge of those
conversations. Kennedy, who has a long history of anti-vaccine
advocacy, and other officials questioned Monarez on Monday on whether
she was aligned with the administration’s efforts to change vaccine
policy, the people said.

Kennedy and one of his top advisers, Stefanie Spear, also pushed
Monarez to fire her senior staff by the end of this week, according to
an administration official and another person with direct knowledge of
that conversation. Spear did not immediately respond to a request for
comment.

Monarez, who was a longtime federal government scientist before
President Donald Trump nominated her to lead the CDC, declined to
commit to support changing coronavirus vaccine policy without
consulting her advisers, two people said. That prompted Kennedy to
urge her to resign for “not supporting President Trump’s agenda,” one
of the people said.

...Demetre Daskalakis, the CDC’s top respiratory illness and
immunization official, posted his scathing resignation letter on X
where he blasted Kennedy and his appointees for unraveling coronavirus
vaccine recommendations, which he said “threaten the lives of the
youngest Americans and pregnant people.”

“I am not sure who the Secretary is listening to, but it is quite
certainly not to us. Unvetted and conflicted outside organizations
seem to be the sources HHS use over the gold standard science of CDC
and other reputable sources,” Daskalakis wrote. “At a hearing,
Secretary Kennedy said that Americans should not take medical advice
from him. To the contrary, an appropriately briefed and inquisitive
Secretary should be a source of health information for the people he
serves. As it stands now, I must agree with him, that he should not be
considered a source of accurate information.”

...Before becoming HHS secretary, Kennedy had falsely called the
coronavirus vaccines the “deadliest vaccine ever made” and said they
contained a “poison.”

...The agency had been reeling from the gunman’s Aug. 8 attack on its
Atlanta headquarters, which forced hundreds of workers into lockdown
and left a police officer dead. The shooter was frustrated by the
coronavirus vaccine and blamed it for his health problems, according
to law enforcement officials, neighbors and his father. Trump has not
publicly addressed the shooting.

Comments...

I want to believe that because we survived 45, we can survive 47, but
there are days I’m not so sure.  This is one of them.

My local public radio today had a segment today with national
physician vaccination leaders discussing where people are to get
vaccine recommendations going forward since THE CDC CAN NO LONGER BE
TRUSTED. I am a physician and in my mind this is simply the new
reality that any CDC/HHS pronouncement or decision on vaccines cannot
be trusted full stop. They pointed to The American Academy of
Pediatrics, The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
the Public Health Agency of Canada and the European Center for Disease
Prevention and Control. But of course this is a tall task to require
even high information citizens to seeks out and parse through
alternative recommendations and then further figure out if the vaccine
will be made available to them and whether they have to pay out of
pocket.

I’m still astounded and appalled that a lawyer who sues vaccine
manufacturers for a living is now deciding who gets vaccines and who
doesn’t.

Last reports I heard out of DC insiders was that he's considering
banning covid vaccines & mRNA tech process use all together - meaning
they won't be available for purchase either. Incidentally that could
negatively impact vaccine production and distribution beyond the US in
conjunction with USAID dissolution. He'll be a mass murderer & should
be held accountable

Thanks Susan for standing up for CDC employees and the agency after
the shooting. Trump didn’t even acknowledge the horror employees felt
after the incident where a police officer died



8/28/25: WP.  CDC leaders who resigned said RFK Jr. undermined vaccine
 science, risking lives / As the CDC reels from departures, the White
 House appoints Jim O’Neill as acting director.

As the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reeled from the
ousting of its director, three senior leaders who resigned in protest
told The Washington Post they were asked to participate in an
unscientific vaccine recommendation process that they believe could
harm the health of Americans.

...Demetre Daskalakis, who resigned as the agency’s top respiratory
illness and immunization official, said the CDC had reached an
“unfettered situation where undue influence and ideology would drive
the science.”

The criticism from departing CDC leaders prompted Sen. Bill Cassidy
(R-Louisiana), who chairs the Senate’s health committee and cast a
pivotal vote to confirm Kennedy, to call for the delay of an upcoming
meeting of Kennedy’s vaccine advisers to review vaccine
recommendations. “These decisions directly impact children’s health
and the meeting should not occur until significant oversight has been
conducted,” Cassidy said in a statement.

...As the founder of an anti-vaccine group, Kennedy has a history of
falsely linking vaccines to autism and other unscientific
claims. Kennedy has criticized the CDC often, calling it a “cesspool
of corruption” and arguing it’s in the pocket of the pharmaceutical
industry.

Since taking the nation’s top health job, Kennedy has continued to
disparage those who work in public health, saying in an interview
after a gunman who opposed coronavirus vaccines fired hundreds of
rounds at the CDC’s Atlanta headquarters this month that public health
agencies “have not been honest.” CDC employees grew angry at Kennedy’s
response to the shooting, arguing that he is responsible for
misinformation that has turned citizens against public health
workers. Hundreds of current and former HHS and CDC workers called for
Kennedy to resign following the shooting.

...Monarez wrote an op-ed about the attack on the CDC buildings and
how vaccine misinformation can be harmful and drive violent rhetoric,
according to Houry. But when Monarez sent the op-ed to HHS for
clearance, it was returned to her with “significant revisions” and
Monarez no longer wanted to submit it “because it was no longer her
voice,” according to Houry, who said Monarez told her what happened.

Comments...

I remember as a young Elementary school student lining up to get the
newly created and released vaccine. I had a few friends in iron lungs
and was pretty positive it would interfere with my sports activities,
but the fact that every kid's parents were there to see their child
get vaccinated really impressed me. All of the mothers were crying
with relief and many of the father's eyes were watery with tears. As a
scientist in my later years, I am outraged that one of my adult
children will not qualify for CDC guidelines and none of my
grandchildren can receive it. 

   [cont] Our health decisions are being made by a lawyer who rather
   thinks he knows more than the Medical and Scientific experts, even
   though he has absolutely no knowledge of experimental design or
   analysis of data. This is a lawyer who has fired anyone qualified
   to make vaccine safety decisions and replaced them with quacks,
   opportunistic influencers, and political ideologists. The few
   replacements for qualified scientists with medical degrees are not
   scientists or so far out in left field that any medical opinion
   they have on vaccines would fail to pass peer review. 

   RFK Jr. may be qualified to research legal cases, but he hasn't a
   clue on how to conduct or evaluate medical research. For the first
   time in my life, I can not trust anything the majority of Federal
   agencies say because the opinions or statements are coming from
   people who are totally incompetent in their fields or they have no
   actual experience or education on what they are regulating, just
   ideological political purity.

       Every kid's parents were there? There were no parents,
       permission slips or debates when I received the first available
       Salk polio vaccine. The public health workers came to the
       school, grabbed us by class batches, willing or not, we were
       all vaccinated and the iron lung wards started to close in the
       state hospitals. That was a public health miracle, and couldn't
       happen today because everything seems to be a cause for debate
       or a matter of viewpoint, mostly ignorant, ill informed or
       malicious.

       Actually clarkii, he cant even perform legal research properly
       because he can't differentiate between facts and opinions. This
       is the same failing as with vaccines, no matter the field.

The whole world is laughing at the stupidity of this administration
and especially the extraordinary dumb decisions of the HHS Secretary
Kennedy who was appointed to this post only because of his loyalty to
the Dictator in Chief. Immediate firing of this incompetent can
hopefully restore the proven scientific approach to the health of
Americans before it's too late.

I remind readers that two parents whose unvaccinated child died of
measles during the Texas outbreak said they didn’t intend to have
their other children vaccinated. That is the kind of intransigence we
are up against.

Kennedy means so much to so many people. We should believe him because
he has a name that doesn't just rhyme with that of a famous president,
but is actually the same. As a former trial lawyer he is uniquely
qualified to view evidence in a balanced manner without being partial
because that's the opposite of what trial lawyers do. The fact that he
got his job as a direct quid pro quo for a Trump endorsement is also
reassuring. Who better to root out conflicts or interest than someone
who received his job as a benefit for a political favor? I hope I've
reassured some of the naysayers. Everything is going to be
fine. Please go back to your regularly scheduled political
infotainment.

Several years ago I had lunch with two retired nurses who graduated
with me from 8th grade in 1956. I mentioned that we had been a "tough"
generation who got all the childhood diseases (measles, mumps, chicken
pox) before vaccines were developed and we all survived.  After a long
silence, the nurses said that they spent their entire careers
attending to people who suffered long term consequences from those
diseases. And, I even learned that one of the nurses got polio as a
child before the vaccine was developed. I felt like a fool.


8/29/25:  Van Scoyoc Washington Week in Science

White House restores stalled CDC research funds 

  Tens of millions of dollars in funding for health programs run by
  the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) that had been
  blocked by the Trump administration is being released to
  grantees. According to several CDC employees, the White House Office
  of Management and Budget (OMB) approved the agency’s spending plans
  for specific grants, which had been held up since at least the end
  of July. Read more:  The Hill

RFK Jr cancels $500m in funding for mRNA vaccines for diseases like Covid 

  The US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) plans to cancel
  $500m in funding for mRNA vaccines being developed to counter
  viruses that cause diseases such as the flu and Covid-19. That will
  impact 22 projects being led by major pharmaceutical companies,
  including Pfizer and Moderna, for vaccines against bird flu and
  other viruses, HHS said. Health Secretary Robert F Kennedy Jr, a
  vaccine sceptic, announced he was pulling the funding over claims
  that "mRNA technology poses more risks than benefits for these
  respiratory viruses". Read more:  BBC News

Supreme Court allows NIH to axe millions of research funds related to DEI 

  The Supreme Court will allow the National Institutes of Health to
  cut millions of dollars allocated for research funds as the Trump
  administration continues its effort to bar federal funds from
  supporting diversity, equity and inclusion. The court ruled 5-4 on
  Thursday to allow the administration to cancel $783 million in
  previously allocated grants, reversing a lower court’s order
  blocking the cuts.  However, the justices left in place a portion of
  the lower court’s ruling that threw out the original guidance
  documents outlining the policies, raising questions about whether
  the administration will be able to withhold research dollars for
  similar reasons moving forward. Read more:  Health Care Div

GSA launches search for new Alexandria office space to house displaced National
Science Foundation 

  The General Services Administration has launched an official search
  for office space [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com] in Alexandria to
  relocate the National Science Foundation after the agency
  was displaced from its Eisenhower Avenue headquarters
  [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]. The search comes as the Trump
  administration announced [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com] that the
  Department of Housing and Urban Development would take over NSF’s
  current headquarters at 2415 Eisenhower Ave., forcing the research
  funding agency to find new accommodations. HUD Secretary Scott
  Turner, Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin, and GSA Commissioner Michael
  Peters made the announcement at the NSF headquarters, emphasizing
  taxpayer savings and improved working conditions for HUD
  employees. Read more:  NSF

NSF invests over $74 million in 6 mathematical sciences research institutes 

  The U.S.  National Science Foundation is investing over $74 million
  in six research institutes focused on the mathematical sciences and
  their broad applications in all fields of science, technology and
  many industries. Reflecting the universal usefulness of the
  mathematical sciences, the institutes have partnered with and
  received support from a broad range of public and private
  organizations, including the U.S. Department of Energy's Argonne
  National Laboratory, the Air Force Research Laboratory, NASA Goddard
  Space Flight Center, Advanced Micro Devices, IBM, Microsoft, the
  Gates Foundation, the Simons Foundation and many others. Read more: 
  NSF


SEPTEMBER


9/5/25: IHE.  UC System Warns of Broader Risks in Federal Funding
Fight

The University of California system is warning state lawmakers that
federal funding cuts could extend well beyond UCLA as tensions between
the Trump administration and American colleges continue to rise.

UC president James B. Milliken wrote a letter to dozens of local
elected officials Tuesday explaining that “the stakes are high and the
risks are very real.” The system’s 10 institutions could lose billions
of dollars in aid, forcing its leaders to make tough calls about
staffing, the continuation of certain academic programs and more, he
said.

PRESIDENT TRUMP HAS ALREADY FROZEN MORE THAN $500 MILLION IN GRANTS AT
UCLA, allegedly because the Justice Department accused the university
of violating Jewish students’ civil rights. THE PRESIDENT DEMANDED THE
UNIVERSITY PAY A $1.2 BILLION FINE TO UNLOCK THE FUNDS, and system
officials are worried that more funding cuts are likely. California
lawmakers have repeatedly urged the UC system not to capitulate.  Most
Popular

In an August letter, State Sen. Scott Wiener, a Democrat and chair of
the Joint Legislative Budget Committee, and 33 other lawmakers told
Milliken that Trump’s actions were “an extortion attempt and a page
out of the authoritarian playbook,” the Los Angeles Times reported.

Milliken wrote in Tuesday’s letter that a loss in funding would
“devastate” the system and harm students, among other groups.

“Classes and student services would be reduced, patients would be
turned away, tens of thousands of jobs would be lost, and we would see
UC’s world-renowned researchers leaving our state for other more
seemingly stable opportunities in the US or abroad,” he wrote.

If the UC system loses federal funding, it would need about $4 to $5
billion a year to make up the difference, Milliken added. “That is
what fighting for the people of California will take.”



9/5/24: FYI.  House Joins Senate in Rejecting Drastic NIH Cuts Pushed
by Trump / The House has proposed a nearly $500 million cut to NIH,
far short of the White House’s request.

Congress is on track to reject the Trump administration’s proposal to
gut funding for the National Institutes of Health.

The House Appropriations Committee’s Labor, Health and Human Services,
Education and Related Agencies Subcommittee unveiled its fiscal year
2026 budget plans this week. Committee members voted 11-7 to advance
the bill during a markup session on Tuesday, with Democrats opposing.

While the committee has yet to publish a full breakdown of its
spending proposal, a Democrat press release says the bill will include
a $47.8 billion budget for NIH — a reduction of $456 million, but far
short of the $19.4 billion cut proposed in President Donald Trump’s
budget request. The House proposal also appears to reject White House
plans to restructure NIH’s 27 institutes and centers.

The Senate has proposed increasing NIH’s budget to $48.7 billion for
fiscal year 2026. Senators also rejected plans to reorganize NIH and
included a reminder in their appropriations bill that 24 of the NIH’s
institutes and centers were established in statute, and that plans to
restructure them should be communicated to the Senate and the House
with ample notice.

House Appropriations Committee Chairman Tom Cole (R-OK) said in an
online statement that the budget proposal directs taxpayer dollars
“where they matter most” and “prioritizes cutting-edge biomedical
research.” At the markup hearing on Tuesday, Ranking Member Rosa
DeLauro (D-CT) disagreed — urging her colleagues to block the bill.

“The bill cuts NIH research funding by $500 million,” DeLauro
said. “This comes as Russ Vought [director of the Office of Management
and Budget] has canceled previously awarded grants, throwing away
potential life-saving cures or treatments and wasting millions of
dollars in the process.”

DeLauro added that the proposed NIH cuts are “sad” because for “eight
straight years” she worked with Cole to provide annual increases for
NIH research.  “Biomedical research used to be a bipartisan priority
in the Congress,” DeLauro said. “Sadly, those days are gone.”

While the House’s proposed NIH budget does include a boost for some
NIH institutes — such as an additional $48 million for the National
Cancer Institute, bringing its budget to nearly $7.3 billion — it also
includes a significant cut to the Advanced Research Projects
Agency–Health. Under the House’s proposal, ARPA-H’s budget would fall
by $555 million to $945 million.  DeLauro and other Democrats on the
committee also voiced concerns about proposed cuts to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. The House bill proposes a $1.7 billion
cut to the CDC, bringing its budget down to $7.4 billion. The Senate
has proposed a cut of $70 million — a 0.8% reduction that contrasts
sharply with the 19% cut proposed by the House.

The proposed CDC budget cuts come as the agency faces a leadership
crisis following the ouster of former CDC Director Susan Monarez and
pressure from Health Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. to change vaccine
policies. Kennedy defended his actions in a Senate Finance Committee
hearing on the administration’s health care agenda this week.

Speaking at the subcommittee markup on Tuesday, Rep. Bonnie Watson
Coleman (D-NJ) said there is a “clear crisis of confidence in this
administration’s management of the CDC.”

“This bill signals to the men and women charged with keeping our
country safe from disease that they are not valued, that this
administration does not believe in their mission, that science must
take a back seat to the ego and the arrogance of the health secretary
and the president,” said Watson Coleman.  “That’s not going to make
America healthy; it’s going to make and keep us sick,” she added.

Congress has less than a month to decide how to fund the federal
government for fiscal year 2026, which begins Oct. 1, or face a
partial government shutdown.  Have a news tip for us? Contact the
author on Signal at lindsaymck.24 or via email at lmckenzie@aip.org.



9/6/25: (Sat) A post on the Facebook "Astronomers" Group from
Shane Davis (UVa):

    It is my understanding that a significant number of researchers
    had their NASA supercomputing accounts first disabled and then
    terminated without warning in the last couple of days. Everyone I
    have heard about this happening to was a Chinese citizen in the US
    on a visa. I will be contacting my university's research office
    because this directly impacts my research, so I would appreciate
    if anyone who knows more about this could share information or
    point me to any media coverage of this (I do not see any at this
    time). My worry is that this affects a significant number of
    astronomers, but only a small number of people at any single
    institution, so that there will not be effective pushback.
 
    [No add'l comments yet]


9/10/25: Nature editorial.  Climate impacts are real ô denying this
is self-defeating / The US administration is attempting to undermine
efforts to curb greenhouse-gas emissions. It will ultimately leave
that country, and the world, worse off.  [Captured full PDF version]

n July, the administration of US President Donald Trump announced
formally that the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) would seek
to overturn its 2009 ruling that greenhouse-gas emissions endanger
public health and welfare. The move would negate the legal foundation
for many climate regulations. The agency in charge of protecting the
nation's environmental and public health is now arguing that
climate researchers have overstated the perils of global warming.

The EPA's proposal defies the established findings of leading
climate researchers and laboratories, not least those of the United
States. That the world's largest greenhouse-gas emitter, as
measured by cumulative emissions over time, is abandoning its nascent
moves towards decarbonization -- and doing so on such spurious,
unscientific grounds -- should be ringing alarm bells everywhere.

...In support of the EPA's deregulatory proposal, the Department of
Energy (DOE) has published an unprecedented critique of mainstream
climate science (see go.nature.com/4mtwsm5). If implemented, the
proposal would be the first time that a globally respected,
science-based regulatory agency has so thoroughly departed from the
scientific consensus on global warming, represented by the work of
thousands of scientists under the auspices of the IPCC over several
decades. That consensus is, for good reason, the basis of both
international law on climate change and hundreds of national laws and
concurrent actions to stop anthropogenic climate change.

Taking just one of many examples, the DOE report critiques IPCC
findings describing how human-generated emissions are leading to
extreme weather. This is despite the fact that, year after year,
climate-attribution science is getting more accurate.

...The stakes could not be higher: the United States is the currently
second-largest emitter of greenhouse gases, behind China. What the
United States does on climate will affect billions of people. This is
the threat posed by the Trump administration, which is promoting a
dangerous fossil-fuel agenda, rolling back investments in clean-energy
technologies and seeking to block the EPAùs authority to regulate
greenhouse-gas emissions, both now and into the future. Leading
climate scientists have crafted a formal response (see
go.nature.com/41j3fsa), arguing that the DOEùs report makes a
mockery of science by misrepresenting, cherry-picking or outright
ignoring evidence compiled by scientists around the world over the
past several decades. Ultimately the United States, and the world,
will emerge the poorer for it.


9/11/25: From: FYI: Science Policy News from AIP

September 11, 2025
House Science Committee Advances Weather Research Bill

The reauthorization act received unanimous, bipartisan support, but a
similar bill passed the House and stalled in the Senate last year.

A bipartisan bill for weather research advanced out of the House
Science Committee on Wednesday by unanimous vote. The Weather Act
Reauthorization reaffirms and updates NOAA research, forecasting, and
emergency preparedness programs authorized in the 2017 Weather
Research and Forecasting Innovation Act.  The bill recommends between
$160 million and $170 million each year through 2030 for NOAA’s
research office to carry out specified weather research programs,
roughly steady with the program amounts for fiscal year 2024.  “I’ve
seen firsthand that accurate and reliable weather forecasting is
crucial for the day-to-day lives of Americans nationwide,” bill
co-sponsor and former Committee Chair Frank Lucas (R-OK) said in a
press release. “Protecting American citizens and industries stands at
the heart of President Trump’s America First agenda, so I look forward
to seeing this bill reach his desk to be signed into law,” he added.

The House passed similar reauthorization legislation in April 2024,
but the bill did not receive a committee vote in the Senate.

“By taking up this proven framework, we are establishing a clear and
united House position heading into potential negotiations with the
United States Senate,” Committee Chair Brian Babin (R-TX) said in his
opening statement, adding that he looks forward to working with Senate
Commerce Committee Chair Ted Cruz (R-TX) on severe weather
preparedness.

The implementation of the 2017 Weather Act has advanced hurricane
tracking predictions by over 10% and improved tornado warning lead
times by more than 10 minutes, Babin said. In July, the National
Weather Service’s warnings of flash floods in Texas had a 201-minute
lead time, he added.

“Yet, despite that warning, many precious lives were tragically lost,”
Babin said. “This heartbreaking event underscores the urgent need to
strengthen the connection between forecasts and the timely flow of
information to the public.”  Babin also highlighted that the
reauthorization bill directs NOAA to create a pilot program to enter
into contracts with private companies providing observation services
and data. If the program meets NOAA’s standards, the bill directs the
agency to use private observation services and data “when
cost-effective and feasible,” including during acquisition of any
future satellite systems. The bill recommends $100 million each year
through 2030 for the commercial data program.

Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren (D-CA) said the bill will advance data
assimilation, which she called “our most significant limitation in
forecasting accuracy today.” Data assimilation is a weather
forecasting technique that combines real-world observations with a
predictive model. The bill would create a program to test data
assimilation methods, including using machine learning, as well as a
university consortium to support research and draw students to the
field.  The bill also includes a provision to expedite hiring and
onboarding of National Weather Service employees. Rep. Deborah Ross
(D-NC), speaking in favor of the bill, criticized the administration’s
workforce cuts to NOAA earlier this year.  “This bill makes clear that
no matter our political differences, we all agree that safeguarding
lives through accurate forecasting, sustained weather research
funding, and timely alerts must remain a national priority,” she said.
“Unfortunately, the recent DOGE cuts threatened the very foundation of
our weather infrastructure.”

Other Democrats also spoke in support of the bill, noting that it
incorporates several smaller bills co-sponsored with Republican
colleagues. These include bills that aim to boost weather and climate
prediction using advanced computing, and to improve precipitation
forecasts by replacing aging Next Generation Weather Radar (NEXRAD)
infrastructure and supporting NOAA Earth system models.  Committee
members did not mention the administration’s proposal to eliminate
NOAA’s research office. President Donald Trump’s budget request for
fiscal year 2026 preserves about a quarter of the office’s funding,
including for the weather programs prioritized in the reauthorization
bill, by moving it to other NOAA offices. The Senate and House
appropriations committees have both put forth proposals preserving the
research office, but neither chamber has passed its bill.

The committee unanimously adopted many of the offered amendments from
both Republicans and Democrats, while Republicans passed amendments
along party lines to block NOAA from purchasing drones from
Chinese-owned companies and to strike a mention of “communities of
color, low-income communities, Indian Tribes or Indigenous
communities, and rural communities.” Democrats withdrew amendments to
continue leveraging NASA’s expertise in acquiring environmental
satellites and to authorize the National Integrated Heat Health
Information System, saying they would continue to work across the
aisle on those topics.


9/12/25: FYI Subject: ‘Nearly Unmanageable’ Research Regulations
Tackled by New Academies Report

‘Nearly Unmanageable’ Research Regulations Tackled by New Academies
Report

A committee convened by the National Academies recently produced 53
proposals to reduce the red tape surrounding federally funded research
without sacrificing its integrity, security, or value.

The recommendations published last week are the result of an expedited
effort to inform the Trump administration’s push to cut regulations
and reduce federal funding for research.

“With federal research agencies facing billions of dollars in budget
cuts and reductions in staffing, there is not only the opportunity but
the necessity to optimize the nation’s investment in academic research
by allocating more time and money to conducting research and reducing
the time and money spent on administrative tasks,” the report states.

Science advocates, including leaders at the National Academies and
groups such as COGR, an association of research institutions that
advocates for research policy, have long called on Congress and the
federal government to reduce the regulatory burden on researchers and
research administrators by streamlining requirements across federal
agencies, but the report finds that relatively little progress has
been made and that regulations have continued to proliferate.

“This year, significant federal actions and policy changes, some of
which have come quickly without sufficient implementation guidance and
consideration of their effects on the scientific enterprise, have
added administrative workloads and created uncertainty, especially for
research universities,” the report states.

“There is a tremendous amount of regulation and policies that overlay
on the conduct of science, and there is great concern that the
excessive, uncoordinated, and sometimes duplicative or inconsistent
policies are hampering progress in science,” Committee Chair Alan
Leshner said during a report release webinar last week.

While the 120-page report recognizes the need for checks and balances
to ensure federally funded research is conducted responsibly, Leshner
noted in his introduction to the report that the growing list of
federal requirements has created a “nearly unmanageable” workload for
researchers, administrators, and research funders.

To reduce that workload, the report proposes several options that
policymakers could pursue to centralize oversight of the research
regulation landscape and increase coordination between agencies. The
report cautions, however, that progress may be difficult to achieve
given legislative barriers, a lack of trust between research agencies,
and unwillingness by institutions to support change given the “the
upset reform can cause.”

“There’s no way that what we are calling for can happen unless
somebody is in charge, somebody makes it happen, and some individual
or group provides the coordination among the over 20 agencies so that
they are, in fact, working together,” Leshner said during the webinar.

The report proposes changes to grant proposal and management
processes, research misconduct investigations, conflict of interest
disclosures, research security requirements, export controls,
cybersecurity standards, and the regulation of research involving
biological agents, humans, and animals. Each proposal in the report is
accompanied by a list of pros and cons that highlight potential
barriers to implementation.


9/12/25:   Van Scoyoc Associates
 
House Appropriations Committee approves CDC funding cut  

The House Appropriations Committee approved the FY2026
Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations bill Tuesday. The bill cuts funding
for the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) by $1.7 billion. CDC
programs recommended for elimination include Domestic and Global
HIV/AIDS Prevention and Research, Sexually Transmitted Diseases,
Tuberculosis, Tobacco Prevention and Control, School Health,
Prevention Research Centers, Community and Youth Violence Prevention,
Climate and Health, the Preventative Health and Health Services Block
Grant, and some Global Vaccination activities, among others. Read
more:  House FY2026 Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations, House FY2026
Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations -- Democrats

House Appropriations Committee rebuffs administration on NIH funding 

The House FY2026 Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations bill approved on
Tuesday includes a total of $47.8 billion for NIH, a decrease of $456
million below the 2025 level.  The administration had requested an $18
billion cut. The bill includes: $7.3 billion for the National Cancer
Institute (NCI), an increase of $48 million above the 2025 level; $2.3
billion for the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), an increase of $20 million above the 2025
level; $2.6 billion for the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), an increase of $30 million above the
2025 level; $6.6 billion for the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), an increase of $20 million above the 2025
level; $945 million for the Advanced Research Projects Agency for
Health (ARPA-H), a decrease of $555 million below the 2025 level. The
bill and report does not approve the administration’s proposal to
streamline and eliminate NIH institutes, but noted the House Energy
and Commerce Committee has jurisdiction over large-scale NIH
restructuring. Read more:  House FY2026 Labor-HHS-Education
Appropriations, House FY2026 Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations --
Democrats

MAHA strategy released: Targets vaccines, chronic disease, childhood nutrition

The Trump administration released a new strategy report for how it
plans to implement its efforts to “Make America Healthy Again” (MAHA),
seeking to make changes to vaccines but sidestepping calls to regulate
pesticides and toxic chemicals. The strategy report builds upon a
previous report outlining what the administration sees as threats to
public health, talking about how it will implement a vision largely
driven by Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Robert. F. Kennedy
Jr. In particular, it seeks policy action on vaccines, setting up a
“vaccine framework” to be developed by the White House Domestic Policy
Council and Kennedy’s department. The report also calls for working to
“reform the approval process” for chemicals and pesticides, but does
not specify what those reforms will be other than to say the goal is
to protect against pests and “increase the timely availability of more
innovative growing solutions for farmers.” Read more:  The Hill
 
US death rate dropped back to pre-Covid levels in 2024, 

CDC report says The death rate in the United States returned to
pre-pandemic levels in 2024 as Covid-19 fell out of the top 10 leading
causes of death, according to a report published Wednesday by the US
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The overall US death rate
has fallen about 18% since 2021, and last year’s 4% drop brought the
US death rate down to the lowest it’s been since 2019. Read more:  CNN

 
House appropriators offer support to threatened NASA missions 

House appropriators offered support, but no specific funding, for
several NASA missions slated for cancellation in the administration’s
2026 budget proposal.  The House Appropriations Committee approved a
commerce, justice and science (CJS) spending bill on a 34-28 vote late
Sept. 10, sending the measure to the full House. The bill includes
$24.838 billion for NASA, nearly the same as the $24.875 billion the
agency received in fiscal 2024 and 2025, and far above the $18.8
billion the administration proposed for fiscal 2026 in May. The report
includes language expressing support for several NASA missions
targeted for cancellation, including the Chandra X-ray Observatory,
the Juno mission at Jupiter and the New Horizons mission in the Kuiper
Belt. Read more:  Space News


NASA blocks Chinese nationals from working on its space programs 

NASA has begun barring Chinese nationals with valid visas from joining
its programs, underscoring the intensifying space race between the US
and China. The policy shift was first reported by Bloomberg News and
confirmed by the US government agency. “NASA has taken internal action
pertaining to Chinese nationals, including restricting physical and
cybersecurity access to our facilities, materials and network to
ensure the security of our work,” NASA press secretary Bethany Stevens
said on Wednesday. According to Bloomberg, Chinese nationals had
previously been allowed to work as contractors or students
contributing to research, although not as staff. Read more:  The
Guardian

 
House Appropriations Committee approves NSF funding cut 

On Wednesday, the House Appropriations Committee approved
the Commerce, Justice, Science (CJS) and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act, which would provide an estimated $76.8 billion for
2026, a 2.8% cut from the 2025 fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30. The
bill would give $7 billion to the National Science Foundation in 2026,
a $2 billion drop from 2025. Read more:  House
Commerce-Justice-Science Appropriations


Federal judge declines to restore $1B in grants cut by NSF 

A federal judge on Wednesday declined to restore more than $1 billion
in research grants cut by the National Science Foundation over
research related to diversity, equity and inclusion while a lawsuit
against the agency goes forward. In the ruling, U.S.  District Judge
Jia Cobb concluded that the court didn’t have the jurisdiction to
temporarily restore the grants and that plaintiffs failed to show they
would experience “irreparable harm” from the agency’s new anti-DEI
policies while the case proceeds. Read more:  Higher Ed Dive

 
House panel protects NOAA labs, research from Trump cuts 

The House Appropriations Committee approved its fiscal 2026
Commerce-Justice-Science spending bill Wednesday, including an
amendment prohibiting the Trump administration from closing NOAA
laboratories and ending university-based cooperatives that provide
fundamental research on extreme weather and climate
disasters. The spending package, which passed 34-28 along party lines,
also includes a manager's amendment requiring NOAA to advance research
on early prediction and warning systems for flood disasters in rural
areas, provide support for NOAA’s Hurricane Hunter program and fund
coral reef research institutes on the Atlantic and Pacific
coasts. President Donald Trump has sought to shrink the nation’s
premier climate science agency but provisions in the House bill would
restore full staffing and funding levels to agencies like the National
Weather Service. The House bill would cut NOAA by nearly $400 million
for fiscal 2026, but the reductions would not be as deep as the
president requested. Read more:  E&E News


9/16/25:  AAS action alert

Date: Tue, 16 Sep 2025 11:08:05
From: American Astronomical Society <public.policy@aas.org>
Subject: Action Alert: Oppose Changes to Visas for International
         Students and Researchers

The federal government has proposed limiting the duration of F and J
visas to a maximum of four years (see details below). This would add
significant uncertainty and potential bureaucratic hurdles for many
international students and researchers in the US. The American
Astronomical Society has partnered with the American Physical Society
to help our members easily submit comments on this proposed rule.
Take a few minutes today to submit a comment:

Currently, F and J visas allow international students and researchers
to remain in the US for the length of the program they were admitted
for, known as “duration of status.” However, under the
administration’s new proposal [rhpiczrab.cc.rs6.net], F and J visas
would expire before graduation for many students. This means that
international graduate students would have to apply and pay a fee for
visa extensions to graduate, without any guarantees that delays or
denials will not disrupt their research and lives.

A public comment period on this proposed rule is open until 29
September. The administration must respond to each unique comment
submitted, so we encourage you to use the tool we linked here and
submit your comment [rhpiczrab.cc.rs6.net]. This tool provides three
easy prompts to walk you through writing and submitting your proposal
in under 15 minutes. Upon submitting, your comment will be uploaded
to Regulations.gov [rhpiczrab.cc.rs6.net].



9/17/25: FYI ‘Gold Standard Science’ Plans Emphasize Existing Agency
Efforts

Agency plans to implement Trump’s “gold standard science” order explain how
long-standing initiatives align with its tenets.

Agency plans for implementing the “gold standard science” executive
order by President Donald Trump largely commit to continuing or
expanding long-standing policies relating to scientific integrity and
public access, contrasting with the strong reform language presented
in the original order.

The plans began to roll out last month, after a 60-day drafting
deadline triggered by the release of guidance by the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy. NASA, the National Science
Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, and the Department of
Energy are among the agencies that have publicly released their plans.

The guidance directed agencies to describe how they are working to
ensure the science they support is reproducible, transparent,
unbiased, and free of conflicts of interest, among other goals.

“For the entirety of these federal agencies’ existence, they’ve really
been working to increase all of these things, and I think that’s
really well reflected in the reports that came out of NIH, DOE and
NSF,” said Maryam Zaringhalam, senior director of policy at the Center
for Open Science and a former OSTP official during the Biden
administration.

  Cultural change

Agencies were also required to identify challenges to implementing the
executive order’s goals.

NSF’s plan states that “cultural change” will be needed in the
scientific community to achieve “broad adherence” with some of the
order’s tenets, such as accepting null results as a positive outcome
for research projects. NSF says it will work to develop “establish
community-driven and community-accepted norms” for sharing of null or
negative results.

Ian Banks, director for science policy at the Foundation for American
Innovation, applauded the mention of cultural change in NSF’s plan,
saying “in order to address the reproducibility crisis and to improve
scientific integrity, we have to address the cultural problems.”

“Scientific cultures as we have them today are truly conservative in
the sense they resist change, but we clearly need change, and the gold
standard science is a path towards that change,” Banks added.

However, Zaringhalam believes the agencies’ implementation reports
push back against the notion that sweeping changes are needed.

“The idea of restoring something that has somehow fallen away or
crumbled in previous administrations, I think, is … problematic,”
Zaringhalam said.  She also argued that the Trump administration has
failed to live up to its own definition of gold standard science,
stating, for instance, that DOE did not use a regular peer review
process for the recent report it commissioned that concluded the
effects of greenhouse gas emissions are less damaging than is widely
accepted.

Jules Barbati-Dajches, an analyst for the Center for Science and
Democracy at the Union of Concerned Scientists, said that the nature
of the implementation plans also leaves room for undue political
influence in science.

“The biggest reason that scientific integrity policies were created in
the first place was to prevent inappropriate influence in scientific
processes … mainly like political influence,” Barbati-Dajches
said. “And there was no emphasis of that in the OSTP guidance.”

Concerns over political influence have been stoked by the Trump
administration placing enforcement of the gold standard science
principles in the hands of political appointees.

OSTP Director Michael Kratsios has defended the oversight model as
consistent with democratic government. “It is the responsibility of
those appointed to represent the people to help direct and coordinate
the taxpayer-supported research enterprise in the national interest,”
he wrote in a June op-ed.

  Academic freedom

Although the agency implementation plans generally build on existing
initiatives, one notable shift from the status quo is that NIH’s plan
states the agency is placing a new focus on “academic freedom.”

NIH’s attention to the subject has been driven by NIH Director Jay
Bhattacharya, who announced in April that the agency would be
reviewing its Intramural Research Program to make sure NIH scientists
can engage in “open, academic discourse without fear of official
interference, professional disadvantage, or workplace retaliation.”

NIH’s plan states the agency is modifying its policies governing
researcher interactions with the media and is “exploring plans to
shift its process for scholarly works from approving scientific
content or findings to reviewing exclusively for policy and regulatory
compliance.”

While many NIH scientists have applauded the focus on academic
freedom, 484 staff signed a letter to Bhattacharya in June arguing the
Trump administration has selectively applied the principle. The letter
points to recently interrupted grants on subjects such as health
disparities and COVID as examples of censorship.

Other agency plans do not use the academic freedom terminology but do
address ways of fostering dissenting opinions. For instance, NSF plans
to “expand the specific clauses on ‘differences of scientific opinion’
in the upcoming updated Scientific Integrity Policy.”



9/19/25: Science.  NSF held captive / Trump directives have undermined
   a 75-year history of independence and threaten agency’s vaunted
   track record for excellence

     Illustration of Trump steering a ship with the NSF logo on the
     wheel. He is in the middle of rapidly turning the wheel, causing
     the ship to lean.  Scientific paraphernalia such as beakers are
     in disarray and falling over, and a scientist is falling off the
     ship in the background.  Stephan Schmitz/Folio Art


In April, the National Science Foundation (NSF) announced its latest
class of graduate research fellows, a storied program dating from the
agency’s earliest days that has fueled the careers of 50 Nobel laureates
and attracts more than 12,000 applications each year. To many
scientists’ dismay, NSF had chosen just 1000 fellows—half the usual
number and 1200 fewer than it had originally promised to fund.

So the community applauded 2 months later, when NSF named 500 additional
fellows. NSF officials never explained why the agency originally shrank
the program and how it found the money to expand this year’s cohort. But
the answer soon emerged: NSF’s leaders weren’t calling the shots. The
Trump administration was.

“We wouldn’t have been able to do [the second round] without the direct
intervention of Michael Kratsios [director of the White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy],” Brian Stone, NSF’s acting director,
told NSF’s presidentially appointed oversight body, the National Science
Board (NSB), during its 23 July meeting. “I just wanted to express my
appreciation for what OSTP was able to do.”

The ups and downs of the fellowship program testify to the biggest
transformation in the 75-year history of the agency, which prides itself
on funding the best nonmedical academic research while staying out of
the political fray. But NSF has lost much of its independence and been
buffeted by politics in the 8 months since President Donald Trump took
office.

The White House has ordered the $9 billion agency to abandon
long-running programs, terminate more than 2000 grants, and reverse
decisions on what to fund next based on the administration’s political
agenda, which excludes diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) efforts
and climate change research. NSF is also making radical changes in its
daily operations, including sharply reducing its reliance on top
academic scientists on loan from their institutions and realigning the
agency’s entire grantmaking apparatus to conform to Trump’s priorities
(see sidebar, below <#sidebar>).

Many science policy experts say those changes move NSF away from its
founding principles, laid out in a 1945 report to then-President Harry
Truman, to maintain U.S. leadership in science by funding the best ideas
across all fields and training the next generation of researchers. That
compares with the more targeted missions of most government agencies,
such as advancing energy, health, or space exploration. But both of
NSF’s goals, as put forward by Vannevar Bush in his seminal report that
led to NSF’s creation in 1950, have lost support under Trump.

“This administration doesn’t buy the idea that the government’s
investment in basic research buys us anything useful,” one former senior
NSF official says. “And if they don’t agree with Bush’s assumption, then
why bother to even have an NSF?”

Insiders describe a crisis of morale. In May, after only 11 months as
head of NSF’s computing directorate, Gregory Hager reluctantly
concluded that NSF’s loss of autonomy had made his job so unattractive
that he resigned and returned to his faculty position at Johns Hopkins
University. “My ability to carry out my vision and to be a voice for
computing research are diminished to the point that I can have more
impact outside NSF than within it,” Hager wrote in a letter to the
community, perhaps the first time a top-level NSF official has cited
disagreement with agency policies as the reason for their departure.

NSF hasn’t had a Senate-confirmed director since 24 April, when
Sethuraman “Panch” Panchanathan resigned abruptly, declaring, “I have
done all I can.” Panchanathan left only 10 days after staffers from the
so-called Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) had set up shop at
the agency’s headquarters in Alexandria, Virginia. The grant
terminations began the next week.

DOGE’s intervention in NSF’s gold-standard grantmaking process was also
more than sociologist Alondra Nelson could stomach. Nelson, an NSB
member and acting OSTP director under former President Joe Biden,
resigned her board position on 13 May. She was only 7 months into her
6-year term.

The board, she wrote in a /Time /essay, has been reduced to a
“ceremonial assemblage … given the freedom to speak [without] the
possibility of being heard.” Instead, she wrote, DOGE has been granted
the authority “to give thumbs-up or -down to grant applications which
had been systematically vetted by layers of subject matter experts.”

Keivan Stassun, who was named to NSB in January 2023, sees DOGE
operating as the ultimate decision-maker at NSF, in tandem with the
White House Office of Management and Budget. And OMB, he says, has
discarded NSF’s well-regarded system of choosing the most worthy
proposals. “If OMB is using anything like NSF’s merit review criteria,”
says Stassun, an astrophysicist at Vanderbilt University, “that has not
been communicated and is certainly not apparent to me.”

Taking orders from the White House has forced NSF staff to walk a
tightrope, one NSF program manager says. “Yes, NSF has to carry out the
priorities of the president,” says the program manager, who requested
anonymity to avoid repercussions. “But we’re all trying to find a way to
educate scientists on how to dance the new dance we’ve got to dance
without violating our principles.”

    Even if I turn only a few degrees each time, after 10 or 15 times
    I’m going to be heading off in a different direction.

        * *Gregory Hager*
        * Johns Hopkins University

NSF hasn’t stopped making new awards, many of them in areas the
administration favors—such as artificial intelligence (AI), quantum
information science, and advanced manufacturing—and other topics
industry is also eager to support. But even there, clouds are gathering:
If Congress agrees to Trump’s request to reduce the agency’s budget next
year by more than half, all NSF programs would suffer.

NSF declined to make anyone available for comment, and NSB Chair Victor
McCrary refused repeated requests to talk about the agency’s new
direction. But dozens of interviews with scientists from many
disciplines, including current and former NSF employees who asked to
remain anonymous for fear of retribution, reveal the extent of NSF’s
transformation.

Four high-profile programs highlight the changes. One was caught in the
crossfire between the White House and universities over alleged
antisemitism on campus. Another fell victim to the administration’s push
to end efforts to promote diversity, and two others illustrate how
scientists and administrators now tailor their proposals to conform to
White House priorities.


    Collateral damage

For more than 4 decades, NSF has supported a network of institutes that
bring together top mathematicians and rising stars for in-person
workshops to explore a range of hot topics and spark new areas of
research. “The math institutes are the crown jewels of our portfolio,”
says mathematician Juan Meza, former director of NSF’s math division,
which spends roughly 15% of its annual budget on the network. “They
support the entire mathematical community.”

The Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM) at the University
of California Los Angeles (UCLA) has been part of that network since
2000 and is known for bridging the gap between academia and industry by
working on problems that appeal to both theoretical and applied
mathematicians. Early-career scientists especially benefit, notes IPAM’s
director, UCLA mathematician Dimitri Shlyakhtenko. “This is the place
where you can go and talk to a person whose papers you read and pick up
insights that can be career changing,” he says.

On 27 July, NSF issued an embargoed press release announcing it would
fund seven institutes in the network, including IPAM, which would get
another $17 million over the next 5 years. But when the news became
public a week later, IPAM wasn’t on the list.

The cause of the about-face was White House politics. On 29 July, the
U.S. Department of Justice announced UCLA was guilty of antisemitism and
violating the civil rights of its Jewish students. The next day, NSF
cited that finding in a letter to UCLA Chancellor Julio Frenk saying the
agency was suspending 300 research grants, including what was left of a
$25 million grant awarded to IPAM in 2020, and removing IPAM from the
next round of winners.

“This is a lot bigger than IPAM,” says Shlyakhtenko, whose own $420,000
NSF grant was suspended, noting that the Trump administration has
targeted several elite universities for alleged discrimination. “I think
the people at NSF are trying to do the best they can. But they are
operating under serious constraints.”

On 12 August a federal judge in San Francisco ruled that the suspensions
were illegal, and the next day NSF reinstated the grants. The ruling is
part of a related, ongoing class action suit by UC faculty whose grants
were terminated earlier this year by several federal agencies.

IPAM plans to support workshops scheduled for the fall with funds left
from its 2020 grant and hopes to raise $500,000 from private donors. But
that’s only a temporary solution, Shlyakhtenko acknowledges. “I’m hoping
that, once the dust settles, NSF will agree that the things we’re doing
are sufficiently well aligned with its mission that we would be able to
get some funding from them.”


    “Not aligned to NSF priorities”

U.S. minority populations have historically been severely
underrepresented in the nation’s pool of data scientists and coders. The
Carpentries, a nonprofit group, has worked to fix that imbalance. Since
2012 it has recruited 5000 volunteer instructors to train more than
100,000 “novice learners.”

So when CEO Kari Jordan and chief scientist Erin Becker learned last
fall about an NSF program that supports organizations like theirs, they
rushed to apply. After Trump took office they assumed their bid was
hopeless. “We had seen the executive orders that had just come out
[banning federal agencies from supporting DEI activities] and figured
that meant we wouldn’t be getting an award,” Jordan says.

To their surprise, NSF told them in February they were in line for $1.5
million over 2 years to do even more to diversify the coding community.
“We were shocked,” Becker recalls.

But their elation was short-lived. “Your proposal has been flagged for
DEI content,” an NSF officer wrote to them on 15 May. “It contains
activities for the retention of underrepresented students which has a
limitation or preference in outreach, recruitment, participation that is
not aligned to NSF priorities,” the email continued. “Accordingly, NSF
requires the project remove the planned activity.”

Jordan and Becker thought about doing that. “But DEI programming is one
of our core values. It’s baked into everything we do,” Becker says.
“It’s not just providing a diverse community of learners with the
necessary technical skills,” she adds. “It’s also making sure they feel
recognized, supported, and empowered.” She and Jordan also worried that
if they accepted the award and NSF later found new reasons to withdraw
it, their small organization might not survive the blow. So 2 weeks
later, The Carpentries withdrew its proposal.

Despite opting out, Jordan doesn’t criticize other organizations that
have agreed to accept NSF’s conditions to remain eligible for funding.
“That amount of funding can really lift up your organization or your
research program,” she says. “And we’re all in a very difficult position
because you’re talking about people’s livelihoods. So I understand their
decision.”

Conceptual illustration. Trump standing at a White House podium. A
tightrope is stretched between the two microcophones, and three
scientists are attempting to balance on it.
Stephan Schmitz/Folio Art


    A marriage of convenience

When a high-powered academic team asked NSF for funding to develop
software for tapping the massive, open-source public databases that have
become essential for doing cutting-edge science, the agency saw an
opportunity to please the Trump administration. It tailored the proposal
even more closely to White House priorities by playing the role of
matchmaker between the applicant and a leading semiconductor company.

On 13 August, NSF made a 5-year, $75 million award to the Allen
Institute for Artificial Intelligence (Ai2) to extend its current open
language model so it can be trained on graphics and images as well as
data. Industry colossus Nvidia agreed to supplement the award with $77
million worth of its advanced graphic processing unit chips and related
software.

The grant comes from NSF’s midscale infrastructure program, which
provides up to $100 million for user facilities that are too costly to
be part of an individual grant. It will allow the team to advance “the
science of AI,” says project leader Noah Smith, a computer scientist at
the University of Washington and head of Ai2’s natural language
processing team. It will also give researchers access to tools to
improve natural language processing models, a boon in a field where most
models are proprietary.

The partnership with Nvidia reflects NSF’s long-standing effort to
foster partnerships with industry and foundations, for which the agency
carved out a new directorate—called Technology, Innovation, and
Partnerships—in 2022. But bringing Nvidia into the project also gave NSF
a chance to contribute to the much-touted AI initiative that the Trump
administration rolled out earlier this year, says Hager, who left NSF
before the award was announced.

“This project was very close to being funded, and it was in an area of
interest to the administration,” Hager explains. “So I think that’s
where the idea of reaching out to Nvidia came up. The project was
essentially shovel-ready. But NSF could point to it and say, ‘Look, this
is how we are supporting the administration.’”

Smith says he welcomes the additional resources. “Nvidia has been a
champion of open-source AI, and open access to models,” he says. “They
build their own … and they make hardware that’s very important to these
processes.”

He and his four co–principal investigators will receive $18.3 million in
the first year of the project. But funding for the remaining 4 years is
contingent on NSF’s overall budget for 2026 and beyond, and the outlook
is grim. If Trump has his way, funding for NSF’s midscale infrastructure
program would drop by nearly 75%, from $160 million in 2024 to $43
million in 2026. NSF has already committed $320 million to four other
projects. It would have to break its promises to most, if not all,
including Smith’s, if Congress accedes to Trump’s wishes.


    Water and oil

Residents of New Mexico and the Navajo Nation suffer from the highest
rate of water insecurity in the United States. It’s a problem that
University of New Mexico biologist David Hanson hoped to address with
funding from an NSF program, launched with much fanfare in 2022, to
combine universities, industry, and nonprofits into a regional
“innovation engine.” The Energized Watershed project he leads, whose
goal is “to efficiently capture, recycle, treat and reuse water,” was
not one of the 10 inaugural winners announced in January 2024. But in
July it was named one of 29 semifinalists for a second round of engines
to be funded in 2026. And this time Hanson thought his engine stood a
better chance.

“Water solutions are also needed for oil and gas exploration,” he says,
referring to an energy sector Trump strongly supports. “There’s also a
growing recognition of the need for water for cooling and operation of
the massive data centers” needed in AI, another priority for the Trump
administration. The region’s brackish water, he adds, is a promising
source of minerals that are in demand commercially.

At the same time, Hanson assured NSF his engine wouldn’t give
preferential treatment to certain groups that are part of his team, in
violation of another Trump directive.

“We are working closely with the Navajo, for example, because they are a
sovereign nation in our region,” he explains. “So we just need to be
clear about that in whatever we say and not focus on [other] things that
the administration isn’t interested in.”

However, even those tweaks weren’t enough. On 18 September NSF winnowed
the competition to 15 finalists—and Hanson’s project isn’t one of them.


    Tighter control

As dismayed as they are by NSF’s loss of autonomy, many staffers and
outside scientists fear worse is to come. They worry an ongoing
reorganization could reduce NSF’s internal expertise and allow tighter
political control.

The agency is eliminating some three-quarters of the roughly 350
“rotators,” the academic scientists who stay from 1 to 4 years and work
alongside federal employees. Simultaneously, it is reducing the number
of supervisors, many of whom are rotators, in its eight research
directorates and replacing them with outside political appointees or
existing NSF staff.

Many current and former NSF officials worry the changes will reduce the
flow of good ideas and, ultimately, lower the quality of the research
NSF supports. “If you cut out the rotators, you stop getting new ideas,”
Meza says.

Having so few rotators will also make it easier for Trump to bend NSF to
his will by replacing its 71 discipline-based divisions with a smaller
number of clusters focused on White House priorities. Rotators now fill
the top two management slots at many of those divisions; under the new
alignment, most clusters would be led by government employees, either
promoted from within or new hires. Some of those new supervisors may not
be experts in the areas they are overseeing, and many NSF watchers worry
those new managers will first need to pass a political litmus test.

Hager says he supports eliminating the traditional divisions if the new
structure fosters more cross-disciplinary research. “Computing is an
evolving discipline, and so that organizational flexibility could make
it a little bit easier to keep up with where the community is going,” he
says. But having topic-based clusters, he cautions, could pose a problem
for other directorates with divisions that correspond to traditional
fields such as math, physics, chemistry, and astronomy. “Program
directors aren’t necessarily fungible in those fields,” he says.

NSF is still working out the details of changes to its upper echelon.
But according to several sources, the plan is to have two people at the
top of each directorate, with the traditional leader, now called an
assistant NSF director (AD), paired with another federal employee. The
AD would serve in an advisory capacity, whereas the second person would
ensure everything the directorate funds reflects the administration’s
priorities. One former senior NSF official compares the latter to
political commissars in the former Soviet Union.

That arrangement could hamper NSF’s ability to attract top scientists,
says geochemist Alexandra Isern, who retired in December 2024 as head of
NSF’s geosciences directorate. “I’d worry about the caliber of
candidates [applying for AD],” she says. “People come to NSF to have an
impact on research in their field, and I’d be reluctant to take a job if
I didn’t have the authority to make decisions.”

And sooner or later change will come to the top of the agency. “Once
this reorganization stuff gets settled, someone will be appointed as the
next NSF director,” Hager says. “And I’ve got to believe it’s going to
be a friend of the administration.”

He fears the eventual effect of many small changes. “Even if I turn only
a few degrees ... after 10 or 15 times I’m going to be heading off in a
different direction,” Hager says.

-----

    How NSF ensures grants don’t ‘do DEI’

By Jeffrey Mervis

The National Science Foundation (NSF) has adopted a kind of honor system
to make sure grantees don’t violate President Donald Trump’s ban on
federal support for programs aimed at increasing diversity, equity, and
inclusion (DEI). Rather than dictating changes, it is asking researchers
to strip objectionable elements from their projects and then certify
they have done so.

First, an internal review searches pending or existing grants for
elements that might violate the anti-DEI directives. “Program directors
have complete discretion on making that decision,” one NSF program
officer says. And they don’t need to note specific violations.

The next step is to contact the offending scientist, who is expected to
consult with their institution—the official recipient of the grant—and
agree on a mitigation plan. “The PI [principal investigator] is then
asked to send us an email saying that they [will] not conduct any
outreach, recruitment, or participatory activities that show a
preference to any protected group,” the program officer explains.

NSF doesn’t ask how the project has been altered. “It’s up to the
[scientist’s] institution to tell us that the project is now in
compliance,” the staffer says, although some program officers give PIs a
chance to ask about how mitigation should work.

At a group meeting with their program officer, “We all just agreed not
to do DEI,” one PI says. Then it’s clear sailing, the officer says.
“After documenting that we had a conversation, I basically would rubber
stamp it and tell my division director, ‘OK, this is ready to go forward.’”




9/22/25:  IHE.  Trump Proposes $100K Fee for H-1B Visa

The Trump administration moved Friday to restrict access to the H-1B
nonimmigrant visa program, which universities make use of, as do many
other industries including technology and finance, The New York Times
reported.

New applicants will have to pay $100,000 in order to qualify for an
H-1B visa, starting with the February 2026 lottery. The change took
effect Sunday but is likely to face legal challenges. The presidential
proclamation directs the Department of Homeland Security to “restrict
decisions on petitions not accompanied by a $100,000 payment.” The
White House clarified over the weekend that the change doesn’t apply
to current H-1B visa holders, Politico reported.

In the proclamation, Trump officials argued that the H-1B program “has
been deliberately exploited to replace, rather than supplement,
American workers with lower-paid, lower-skilled labor.” This has led
to “a disadvantageous labor market for American citizens.”

Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick said Friday in the Oval Office that
the goal was to “make sure the people coming in are the top, top
people,” according to the Times.  He also said, per Politico, that the
aim was to encourage big tech companies to hire Americans.  “The whole
idea is no more with these big tech companies or other big companies
training foreign workers,” Lutnick said. “If you’re going to train
somebody, you’re going to train one of the recent graduates from one
of the great universities across our land. Train Americans, stop
bringing in people that take our jobs.”

Democrats in Congress and others argued that the change would make it
difficult to recruit highly skilled foreign students and workers to
this country.

The H-1B program is capped at 85,000 new visas a year, but colleges
and universities and some other organizations aren’t subject to that
cap.

   [Note the implication: would bring in only $8.5 billion per year to
   the Treasury -- not much in the scope of things -- so policy is
   mainly intended to discourage hiring foreign workers.]

Brendan Cantwell, a professor of higher, adult and lifelong education
at Michigan State University, wrote in his Substack newsletter that
“U.S. higher ed is chock-full of H-1B workers” and that institutions
would struggle to operate without international talent. He expects
that many colleges won’t be able to afford the $100,000 fee.

“Faculty, researchers, including some but not all postdocs, and staff
are often initially hired into U.S. higher education using H-1B
visas,” he said. “Many, if not most, of these people eventually become
permanent residents or U.S. citizens, but for a period of years are
reliant on the H-1B system to live and work in the U.S. Simply put,
without access to H-1B workers, U.S. colleges and universities will
not be able to fill vital roles on campus, especially in science and
engineering fields.”

    [The policy seems to be explicitly aimed at Big Tech companies --
    Amazon, Microsoft, Meta, etc.  The administration may not even
    know that research universities rely on H-1Bs as well.  Glad you
    cozied up to Trump now, boys?]

    [9/29/25: From IHE.  "More than 16,700 employees at colleges and
    universities got H-1B visas approved in fiscal year 2025, but they
    are concentrated at 100 large research institutions."

         --- That rate of hiring implies universities would be drained
             of an additional $1.7B per year!  Of course, they can't
             afford that and will instead hire many fewer H-1B
             people.]

  
9/22/25:  FYI

NATIONAL LABS SEE LAYOFFS AND VOLUNTARY SEPARATIONS

Pacific Northwest National Lab saw involuntary layoffs last week,
following offerings of voluntary separation to some staff, according
to a lab spokesperson. The lab originally asked for 90 volunteers but
said that the necessary number of volunteers was not achieved. The
spokesperson did not address how many people were laid off or accepted
voluntary separations. Staff at Fermi and Argonne Labs have also
received voluntary separation offers in the last month, according to
the Chicago PBS station WTTW. [aip.us17.list-manage.com] Argonne aimed
to cap the accepted separation offers at 60. At Sandia Labs, layoffs
of 400 people are planned to be completed by October, Source NM
reported last month. [aip.us17.list-manage.com] Steeper job losses
have been feared across the national lab system but apparently have
not yet occurred. Back in July, [aip.us17.list-manage.com] California
lawmakers expressed concerns about the prospect of mass layoffs at
national labs.



9/23/25: Astronomy Magazine.  Bipartisan reps urge House leaders to
  add NASA funding protection to stopgap bill / Fearing ‘irreversible’
  cuts, lawmakers are pushing for a special provision, or ‘anomaly,’
  to prevent the White House from cutting billions from the space
  agency's budget during the stopgap funding period.

    Key Takeaways:

  * The White House proposed a 24% budget cut to NASA for fiscal year
    2026, a significant departure from historical precedent, with a 47%
    reduction specifically targeting science programs.

  * Congress, through its House and Senate Appropriations Committees,
    opposes the proposed cuts and has advanced full-year funding bills
    rejecting the White House's reductions, maintaining funding near
    previous levels.

  * A short-term continuing resolution (CR) to avoid a government
    shutdown is under consideration. Concerns exist that this "clean"
    CR, lacking protective language, would enable the Office of
    Management and Budget (OMB) to unilaterally impose the proposed cuts.

  * A Democratic counterproposal to the CR includes specific language
    protecting ongoing NASA missions and development from the proposed
    cuts, highlighting a bipartisan effort to prevent the OMB from
    enacting the White House's budget reductions.

The months-long drama over NASA’s fiscal year 2026 budget has entered a
critical new phase, with a looming government shutdown forcing a
high-stakes confrontation over the agency’s future.

The central conflict pits the White House’s proposed 24 percent cut to
NASA against bipartisan congressional efforts to maintain funding. Now,
with competing stopgap funding measures on the table, a growing chorus
of lawmakers and advocates is pushing for a special provision to protect
NASA, fearing the White House’s Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
will unilaterally impose the deep cuts — including a 47 percent
reduction to the agency’s science programs — on Oct. 1.

“Without inclusion of an anomaly providing guidance on the NASA
budget,” House of Representatives members wrote in a letter to House
Appropriations Committee leaders, “OMB has pledged to apply its
proposed FY 2026 cuts as soon as October 1st. That would result in an
unprecedented, single-year cut to NASA, particularly NASA’s space
science activities, resulting in irreversible impacts on America’s
space leadership and capabilities that ignore congressional intent.”


    *The path to conflict*

The current standoff is the culmination of a lengthy annual budget
process. It began months ago when NASA submitted its own budget
proposal to the White House OMB, the agency responsible for
implementing the president’s policy agenda. Through a series of
negotiations, the OMB adjusted NASA’s request to align with the
administration’s priorities, resulting in the President’s Budget
Request (PBR) being sent to Congress.

This year’s PBR proposed a historic 24 percent cut to the agency, a
stark anomaly from decades of precedent. While the PBR is only a
proposal, it has historically served as a strong indicator of NASA’s
final funding; according to an analysis by The Planetary Society,
Congress has never cut NASA’s budget by more than 11 percent or
increased it by more than 9 percent relative to the PBR, except for
the aftermath of the /Challenger/ disaster.

This historical alignment makes the FY26 proposal a significant
departure from the norm. The ultimate constitutional power to fund the
government rests with Congress, which signaled its strong disagreement
with the administration’s plan. The House and Senate Appropriations
Committees — specifically their subcommittees on Commerce, Justice,
and Science (CJS) — both advanced full-year funding bills that reject
the White House’s cuts. Their proposals maintain funding near the
roughly $24.9 billion level enacted in previous years and are now
awaiting votes on the House and Senate floors.

    *A ‘clean’ stopgap creates a new crisis*

With the Oct. 1 deadline to fund the government looming, Tom Cole
(R-OK), House Appropriations Committee Chairman, released a short-term
solution: the Continuing Appropriations and Extensions Act, 2026. The
bill, known as a continuing resolution (CR), is designed to keep the
government open through Nov. 21, 2025, by continuing funding for federal
agencies at the previous year’s rate. Federal agencies are currently
operating under a similar year-long CR, meaning they are still funded at
fiscal 2024 levels.

Cole described the bill as a “clean, short-term funding extension”
intended to prevent a shutdown. In this context, “clean” means the bill
is free of major policy changes or special funding provisions and is
intended only to extend current funding levels. However, its “clean”
nature is the source of the new crisis, as it lacks the explicit
directive — or “anomaly” — that NASA’s supporters say is necessary to
prevent the OMB from imposing the PBR’s deep cuts. During a briefing on
Wednesday, Jack Kiraly, director of government relations for The
Planetary Society, stressed that the bill should be seen as just an
initial proposal. “It is the opening salvo of what will be a very
contentious two weeks, as we careen towards that Sept. 30 deadline for
the fiscal year,” Kiraly said.

    Democrats counter with NASA protections

In a significant development, Democratic appropriators introduced a
counterproposal to the CR on Wednesday. The bill, from Sen. Patty
Murray (D-WA) and Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-CT), includes the specific
protective language that advocates have been requesting. Section 123
of the bill states that “any [NASA] mission in operation, including
extended operations, or under development or formulation … shall be
continued in such operations, development, or formulation.”

This provision would limit the OMB’s ability to enact the proposed
cancellations. While the bill is unlikely to pass as-is, its
introduction formally places the protection of NASA science on the
negotiating table. “This new bill includes a provision that … would, in
effect, curtail OMB’s ability to enact their cuts and mission
cancellations during the CR,” Kiraly said in an email update to
attendees, including /Astronomy/, the day after the briefing. “The
inclusion of this section shows that NASA Science is a priority for
Congress.”

    The bipartisan push for an anomaly

The Democratic counterproposal builds on a bipartisan effort already
underway. A group of lawmakers led by Reps. Judy Chu (D-CA) and Don
Bacon (R-NE) has been pushing to amend any CR to protect the agency.
They argue that allowing the OMB to implement cuts, even temporarily,
would be “devastating,” wasting billions in taxpayer investment by
terminating almost 20 active space science missions and ultimately
“surrender[ing] space leadership to China.”

Their call has been amplified by a coalition of 15 science, education,
labor, and space advocacy organizations led by The Planetary Society.
The group’s letter highlights the disproportionate impact the proposed
budget would have on research, warning that without protection, the
cuts to NASA’s Science Mission Directorate would lead to the
elimination of more than 40 NASA science projects, including 19 active
missions.

“Congress has already made its intent clear: It rejects these reckless
cuts and supports continued investment in NASA science,” said Kiraly in
a press release. But “without language in the CR, OMB could override
that intent, shutting down missions mid-stream, wasting taxpayer
dollars, and undermining U.S. leadership in space exploration. Congress
must act now to prevent irreversible harm.”

Casey Dreier, The Planetary Society’s chief of space policy, emphasized
that the request is about preservation, not new money. “This is simply a
directive to prevent un-strategic and wasteful mission terminations
rejected by Congress,” Dreier stated.


    Three potential paths forward

In Wednesday’s briefing, The Planetary Society outlined three potential
legislative paths that could determine NASA’s fate in the coming months.
The first, and most immediate danger, is the passage of a “clean” CR
like the one currently proposed. In this scenario, the temporary funding
bill is approved without any protective language for NASA, allowing the
OMB to begin implementing the PBR’s deep cuts and start the process of
shutting down missions. 

The danger, as Dreier explained, lies not in the top-line funding number
but in how the OMB can control the rate of spending. “You have a
potential situation where these dramatic cuts could potentially
functionally be implied during a short-term stopgap period. Not because
on paper … you have the same amount of money, but because they are going
to restrict again that flow of money,” Dreier said.

A second possibility is a full-year CR. If Congress remains deadlocked
on full-year appropriations, it could opt to extend the current flat
funding for the rest of the fiscal year. While this would avoid the
immediate cuts of the PBR, The Planetary Society warned that without
specific guardrails, it would create a prolonged state of uncertainty
and leave NASA vulnerable to other administrative actions to withhold funds.

The final path is an “omnibus” spending bill. This would occur if, after
one or more short-term CRs, congressional leaders reach a deal to
combine all the annual spending bills into one large package. Kiraly
described how this process would ultimately reflect the bipartisan
consensus already established in the CJS bills. “Likely, an omnibus will
… use those proposals that are currently being considered by the House
and Senate as the foundation on which they build a bipartisan consensus
around an omnibus funding bill,” he said, resulting, potentially, in “a
final spending package that actually results in a stronger NASA that has
clear stability and direction, provided by the Congress.”


    Human exploration gets a boost

An interesting aside to the annual budget drama reveals the Trump
administration’s apparent interest in human exploration over
science. In July, President Trump signed the “One Big Beautiful Bill,”
a special reconciliation bill that operates outside the normal annual
appropriations process. An amendment added by Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX)
provided nearly $10 billion in supplementary, multiyear funding to
secure the Artemis program, specifically ensuring the continuation of
the Space Launch System (SLS) rocket and Orion spacecraft through
2032.

This apparent focus on human spaceflight at the expense of science has
led observers to speculate about the origins of the administration’s
budget proposal. “The source of this is not the outcome of a considered
policy process, but a factional and potentially even somewhat personal
image for what NASA should or shouldn’t be expressing itself,” said
Casey Dreier, chief of space policy for The Planetary Society, in
Wednesday’s briefing.

This move highlights a contrast in priorities. While the
administration’s own FY26 budget request calls for retiring SLS and
Orion and slashing science, this supplementary funding legally mandates
the continuation of the human exploration programs. The two potential
outcomes are telling: If the OMB imposes the PBR cuts on Oct. 1, NASA
would face a catastrophic 47 percent reduction to its science programs
while its human exploration directorate receives a nearly $10 billion
boost. Conversely, if Congress passes a full-year budget that protects
science, NASA would receive both its standard funding and this
supplementary Artemis money, fully funding both directorates.

    A high-stakes standoff

With the Oct. 1 deadline fast approaching, NASA finds itself at the
center of a high-stakes budgetary battle. While lawmakers have shown
clear support for the space agency, the immediate challenge is ensuring
that a temporary solution to keep the government open doesn’t
inadvertently trigger the deep, long-term cuts they have sought to
avoid. With Democrats now having placed specific protections for NASA on
the negotiating table, the fate of the agency’s science and exploration
portfolio rests on whether Congress can find a compromise before the
clock runs out.


9/25/25: Science.  ‘Completely shattered.’ / Changes to NSF’s graduate
  student fellowship spur outcry The announcement comes months later
  than usual, leaving many would-be applicants stranded

After months of anticipation, the U.S. National Science Foundation
(NSF) today released its instructions for the next round of applicants
to its Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP). To the dismay of
many, the prestigious program, which funds more than 1000 promising
STEM graduate students each year, will now exclude a key group of
students, as second-year Ph.D. students are no longer eligible. The
students who are still able to apply—undergraduates, bachelor’s degree
holders, those in joint bachelor’s-master’s programs, and first year
Ph.D. students—aren’t in the clear either, as some must decide whether
to throw their hats in the ring with an unusually narrow timeframe to
apply.

“I’m very upset and angry,” says Eric Foreman, a second-year Ph.D.
student in biomedical sciences at Augusta University. He and others note
that for the past decade, NSF has only allowed students to apply once
during graduate school, and many are given advice to wait until their
second year, when their applications will be stronger.

Second-year students who had put in significant work on their
applications prior to the solicitation release now feel abandoned. “I
had already completed several drafts of my personal statement and
research proposal,” says University of Chicago molecular engineering
Ph.D. student Ben Broekhuis. After receiving an honorable mention when
he applied as an undergraduate, he opted to sit out the application
process the first year of his Ph.D. after being advised to wait. “Now,
seeing from the solicitation that I’ve been cut out of my opportunity to
apply, I’m completely shattered.”

There are no publicly available data on what proportion of GRFP
applicants, who typically number more than 13,000 per year, are
second-year Ph.D. students. But Susan Brennan, a former GRFP director
who now works at Stony Brook University, says in her experience the bulk
of applications come from people at that stage. “It's completely
unconscionable that NSF is pulling the rug out from under these
students.” She adds that for students coming into graduate school from
less well-resourced universities, having an extra year to get
publications and other research experiences under the belt can be
particularly important.

An NSF spokesperson told /Science/ the changes are meant to “restore the
program's original emphasis on supporting students at the start of their
research careers.”

Some researchers told /Science/ they aren’t opposed to that shift in
emphasis, but NSF should have given students a 1-year warning before
changing the eligibility requirements. “We have a large cohort of
incredibly competitive students … who now can't apply” to one of the
nation’s premier graduate fellowship programs, says Cynthia
Reinhart-King, chair of the department of bioengineering at Rice
University who has served as a reviewer for the GRFP program and has
mentored several fellowship winners. As one second-year Ph.D. student
told /Science/ on the condition of anonymity, “It feels like we are
being punished for following the conventional advice.”

The change in policy now also puts unexpected pressure on first-year
Ph.D. students, many of whom were planning to wait until next year to
submit their applications but now may feel compelled to apply, assuming
the requirements won’t change next year and this will be their last
shot. “It forces many students to propose projects based on limited
experience in a particular research domain, having only been in graduate
school for a few months,” says Ryan Sochol, an associate professor of
mechanical engineering at the University of Maryland. Some may not have
even joined a lab yet, as some Ph.D. programs require students to
complete lab rotations during their first year.

This year’s prospective applicants don’t have much time to make up their
minds. Normally the program solicitation comes out in July, giving
applicants at least 90 days to prepare their materials—a policy that’s
clearly stated on NSF’s website <https://www.nsf.gov/funding/overview>.
But this year's applicants will have just over 6 weeks—and that’s only
after earlier this week the agency extended the posted deadlines by
about 2 weeks, from late October to early November, with no announcement
or explanation. “This is a pretty tight timeline now for the students to
prepare an application,” Reinhart-King says. (When asked by /Science/
whether NSF’s 90-day policy has changed, a spokesperson wrote, “I’ll
look into that and get back to you.”)

The program faced criticism in the spring when this year’s cohort of
winners skewed in favor of the computer sciences -—a field that’s a
stated priority of President Donald Trump’s administration. The
instructions released today say “fellowships will be supported in all
NSF-eligible research areas.” But it adds that the agency “will
continue to emphasize high priority research areas in alignment with
Administration priorities.”

Jason Williams, assistant director of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory’s
DNA Learning Center, says he worries the program has “become liable to
outside influences that are not necessarily really aligned with the
mission of NSF and the mission of the country to create the best STEM
talent.” He and others submitted an open letter to NSF in 2020
<https://jasonjwilliamsny.github.io/grfp2020/> expressing concern when,
during the first Trump administration, the agency first began stating
that artificial intelligence, quantum information science, and
computationally intensive research would be considered high-priority
research areas. Williams had a meeting scheduled today with colleagues,
including Brennan, to decide how to proceed after they posted an open
letter <https://jasonjwilliamsny.github.io/grfp2025/> yesterday about
the delay in guidelines, which quickly garnered hundreds of comments.

They may find a partner in Daniel Bolnick, an evolutionary biology
professor at the University of Connecticut who spoke out on the social
media platform Bluesky after seeing that NSF was revoking eligibility
for second-year Ph.D.  students without any prior warning. “This is so
deeply unfair that it warrants a formal protest from the scientific
community.”


9/26/25:  FYI

AI and Quantum Among Top White House R&D Priorities for FY2027

OSTP’s vision for federally funded research prioritizes emerging technologies,
nuclear energy, biotechnology, national security, and space exploration.

The White House published a memo this week detailing its priorities
for federally funded research in fiscal year 2027.  The memo,
published Tuesday, was authored by Office of Management and Budget
Director Russell Vought and Office of Science and Technology Policy
Director Michael Kratsios. It criticizes years of “unfocused federal
investments weighed down by woke ideology and diversity, equity, and
inclusion initiatives” and aims to realign the federal R&D portfolio
to “serve its core purposes: driving economic growth and high-wage
employment for all Americans, promoting high quality of life, and
ensuring U.S. leadership in critical sectors of the economy.”

Congress, not the White House, ultimately sets budgets for federal
R&D, but the memo signals the Trump administration’s funding
priorities.  These priorities include:

 * Ensuring American leadership in critical and emerging technologies
    through R&D related to artificial intelligence, quantum science,
    semiconductors, advanced communications networks, future computing
    technologies, and advanced manufacturing.

 * Unleashing American “energy dominance” by encouraging agencies to
    prioritize “affordable, reliable and secure energy technologies.”

 * Strengthening American national and economic security by, for
    example, advancing U.S. military capabilities, investing in
    cybersecurity capabilities, and implementing President Donald
    Trump’s vision for a “Golden Dome” missile defense shield.

 * Safeguarding American health and biotechnology through, for
    example, R&D focused on pressing health challenges, boosting
    biosafety, and building domestic biomanufacturing capabilities.

 * Assuring continued American leadership in space through, for
    example, crewed missions to the Moon and Mars, and basic and
    applied R&D into areas such as novel sensing modalities and
    radiation belt remediation.

The memo appears to reflect the Trump administration’s hard turn
against certain STEM education programs and diversity initiatives. An
earlier memo published during Trump’s first term overtly called for
agencies to prioritize “activities that advance innovation in STEM
education and increase diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM.” This
objective is ridiculed in the latest memo, and the Trump
administration has pursued an aggressive campaign to eliminate grants,
programs, and policies that have even passing connections to
DEI. General principles, such as growing the American science and
technology workforce, encouraging partnerships with industry, and
strengthening national security, remain.

As part of its critical and emerging technology goals, the memo
encourages federal investment in “novel AI paradigms and computing
architectures” to realize AI applications such as accelerated
scientific discovery, nuclear fission and fusion, quantum energy
science, advanced space analytics, and remote sensing and
navigation. The memo also emphasizes enhancing methodologies for AI
evaluation and creating structured scientific datasets for AI model
training.  On quantum science, the memo recommends agencies develop
consortia to support R&D efforts, invest in testbeds and other
critical infrastructure, and boost efforts to manufacture
next-generation quantum devices, adding that “funding for related
basic and applied materials research and mathematical and physical
sciences should also be prioritized.”

Achieving American “energy dominance” has been a key talking point of
the Trump administration, with OSTP encouraging federal agencies to
prioritize R&D investments related to fossil fuels, advanced nuclear
fission and fusion, geothermal and hydropower energy, as well as
support the development of advanced reactors, small modular reactors,
fusion energy demonstrators, and processes for nuclear fuel recycling
and reprocessing.

“Federally funded energy R&D should reflect an increased reliance on
the private sector to fund later-stage R&D and commercialization of
energy production, storage, and consumption technologies, while also
supporting user facilities that can improve multisector
collaboration,” the OSTP memo says.

Though the Trump administration has cut federal support for climate
research by, for example, terminating National Science Foundation
grants, the OSTP memo highlights the importance of research focused on
polar regions, urging agencies to “prioritize research and associated
research infrastructure investments that enhance America’s ability to
observe, understand, and predict the physical, biological, geologic,
and socioeconomic processes and interacting systems of the Arctic to
protect and advance American interests and ensure prosperity of
America’s Arctic residents.” The memo also urges agencies to
“maintain, and where feasible, strengthen Antarctic research
infrastructure” — a goal that seems to be at odds with the Trump
administration’s decision to defund the National Science Foundation’s
construction budget earlier this year.


9/28/25: WP.  White House considers funding advantage for colleges
  that align with Trump policies / The proposal could transform the
  government’s vast research funding operation, which has long awarded
  university grants based on scientific merit.

  "COLLEGE COMPACTS"

The White House is developing a plan that could change how universities
are awarded research grants, giving a competitive advantage to schools
that pledge to adhere to the values and policies of the Trump

The new system, described by two White House officials, would represent
a shift away from the unprecedented wave of investigations and
punishments being delivered**to individual**schools and toward an effort
to bring large swaths of colleges into compliance with Trump priorities
all at once.

“Now it’s time to effect change nationwide, not on a one-off basis,”
said**a senior White House official, who like the other official
described the plan on the condition of anonymity because it is still
being developed.

“Suddenly, to get a grant, you need to not demonstrate merit, but
ideological fealty to a particular set of political viewpoints. That’s
not merit,” he said. “I can’t imagine a university in America that would
be supportive of this.”

Since President Donald Trump returned to office in January,
his**administration has launched investigations of and pulled research
funding from universities including Columbia, Harvard and UCLA, and then
worked to extract concessions in exchange for restoring the money.
Officials say the punishments are an effort to enforce federal laws that
bar funding for schools that discriminate on the basis of sex, race or
national origin.

The White House has faced setbacks in court — including abig loss this
month in its high-profile fight with Harvard and another setback last
week in California — and has not reached as many settlement agreements
as Trump officials had hoped for.

The senior White House official described the new system as an
opportunity for schools to show they are in compliance, as interpreted
by the administration. Those that do so, the official said, would be
rewarded with a “competitive advantage” in applying for federal grants.

“I think there will be an opportunity for universities to be
forward-looking and … state their positions out loud: What are the
things that you believe? What are your values? How are you providing
value to students?” the official said. “And that will be something that
not only is important to the administration … but it’ll be super
impactful for students, too.”

The official said the administration also would continue to launch
investigations of individual universities that it believes are in
violation of civil rights laws.

Erwin Chemerinsky, dean of the University of California at Berkeley’s
law school, said “no one will object” if the White House simply requires
universities to pledge compliance with existing law.

But Chemerinsky, one of the attorneys representing UC researchers in a
lawsuit challenging terminated federal research funding, also said the
administration’s view of what the law requires//could be at odds with
other interpretations: “It all depends on what the conditions are, and
whether those conditions are constitutional.”

“It’ll be a whole range of what it means to be a really excellent
institution of higher education,” the official said.

Part of the plan would include asking universities to affirm that they
are not considering race in admissions, which the Supreme Court has
ruled unconstitutional.  Universities maintain that they are no longer
doing so, but the Trump administration suspects many schools are using
proxies for race to, in its view, illegally cling to their diversity
goals.

Some selective universities have tried to build racially diverse classes
by admitting more lower-income students or by targeting recruitment in
high schools with high concentrations of Black and Hispanic students.

Brown University said it would pay $50 million over the next decade to
workforce development organizations in Rhode Island, along with other
concessions, while denying any fault or violation of federal law.

Talks are ongoing with others, including the University of California
system.

While critics complain that the administration is trying to bully
schools into adopting Trump policies, some allies of the White House
have suggested the schools are not having to change much at all. Earlier
this month, conservative activist Christopher Rufo urged the White House
to draw a tougher line.

“Sources are telling me the deal terms are degrading and the WH is at
risk of getting rolled by the university presidents,” he wrote on X.
“Time for a return to principle: President Trump has all of the
leverage and should insist on significant reforms.”

The second White House official rejected any suggestion that the new
approach was motivated by disappointment in the strategies to date. The
current approach has been “very effective” in pushing positive changes
on campus, the official said, pointing to the agreements with Columbia,
Brown and Penn.

“These schools are now embracing common-sense policies, restoring
merit-based admissions, protecting their students and fostering safe
learning environments,” the official said. “This new approach allows
more schools to make positive changes quicker.”

Comments...

AI summary: The comments on the article express strong opposition to
the Trump administration's plan to give funding preference to
universities that align with its policies on admissions and
hiring. Many commenters argue that this approach undermines scientific
merit and academic freedom, turning research funding into a political
loyalty test. They warn that such a policy could damage the U.S.'s
global standing in science and technology, discourage talented
researchers from working in the U.S., and lead to a decline in
innovation. Some comments also highlight concerns about
authoritarianism and the erosion of democratic principles.

Funding based on Trump's policies vs scientific merit? Clorox vs
vaccines. Tylenol vs autism. Magnets vs water. How much more quickly
do they want American excellence to unravel?

More bribery from trump, at a huge cost to the public. Public money
not going to the most qualified, but to those who kiss up to
trump. Could there be anything more wasteful and corrupt?  We are deep
into lunacy with this guy, and it's way past time for the public, and
I mean all the public, not just 60% who are already there, but all the
public to recognize trump for what he is, and demand his resignation.

"and that college costs are not out of line with the value students
receive."  It's not the value that students RECEIVE, it's the value
that students are OFFERED. At the same university one student might
attend class, engage with professors, study hard and get a tremendous
education; another student might do the minimum, party a lot, and do
the minimum to pass. Both will have the same diploma, but one received
a more valuable education because of his or her desire and effort.  I
could buy a high end AI laptop or a cheap one. If I'm only browsing
is the manufacturer of the high end laptop to blame that I'm not
getting the value?

The best solution to [overpriced or low-value degrees] would be to
close hundreds of nonsense-teaching, low-quality, fourth-tier (or
unranked), superstition-driven colleges operated by and for
conservatives seeking dogmatic intolerance, sacred ignorance, and
backwardness.

Universities are complex entities with a multitude of educational and
scientific programs. I agree fully with Dean Chemerinsky, if all that
will be required is that universities comply with the law, there
should be no problem. One aspect of the proposal is troublesome to me
- eliminating useless programs that don't prepare a graduate for
employment. Is the government to decide what is useless? To follow
this line of thought down the proverbial rabbit hole, it leads to a
more fundamental questions - what is the purpose of higher education?
Is it to prepare a graduate for employment? Is it to round out the
individual's talent and to stimulate intellectual curiosity? Is the
government going to answers questions such as these - I hope not. I am
not saying that higher education needs to eliminate or reduce some
academic programs, but knowledge is never "useless."

Ivy league schools get a disproportionate amount of science
funding. The total undergraduate population of all the ivies is the
size of a large state university.  Im all for funding science, but the
selection process for grants should consider how the institution
benefits educating students. We should have a bias towards public
universities.  Private schools like Harvard have the ability to self
fund.

   The research aspect of a university has nothing to do with the
   undergraduate students. The graduate students and certain
   professors do the research.

   Research in the sciences (physics, chemistry, biology,... ) is done
   largely (let's say, 95%) at the level of the GRADUATE programs, and
   POSTDOCTORAL programs.  That is the difference between a "college"
   and a "university."  It's rather apparent that the current White
   House, and colleagues, have no idea what they are talking
   about. Researchers doing science don't spend their time attending
   demonstrations. Their political views are discussed outside
   their professional activities. Get it, Steven Miller?

   We shouldn’t have a bias towards any university. Selection should
   be based on the university’s ability to carry out the research
   based on scientific evidence. Period.

Once again government by historic norms would be abused. Federal
procurement is protected by laws that demand open competition and
merit-based awards, but research funding rests mostly on tradition and
agency practice. That makes it dangerously vulnerable to political
capture. If a White House can tie grants to ideology, the foundation
of peer-reviewed science crumbles. Just as we codified rules to
prevent defense contracts from becoming political patronage, we now
need clear legal safeguards for research. Science should be judged by
merit, not McCarthy era loyalty oaths. Codifying this principle is the
only way to keep politics from distorting discovery.

There is already an unequal treatment of universities and research
funding. For instance, West Virginia and South Dakota faculty who
submit research proposals get extra points for being from those
states. Note that they are both red States. I think if you would look
at Alabama Mississippi and many other red states they would fall into
the same category. Some might call this balancing the scale others
would call it what the administration wants to do and put a finger on
the scale.

University California Santa Cruz offers undergraduate degrees such as
Critical Race and Ethnic Studies and Feminist Studies. There were
often "marches" from the university into the town of Santa
Cruz. During the Black Lives Matter era, the marchers vandalized along
the way, including cutting down the Mission Bell at Mission
Park. There's now a City of Santa Cruz sanctioned kiosk at the spot to
explain that the Spanish Mission that began the town was cruel to
native first people. (Yet most other California cities including
Monterey, Santa Clara, Santa Barbara, Los Angeles still have Mission
Bells at their historic Missions.)

Why is it that the same people who obsess over academic merit in
college admissions and hiring feel free to ignore it when deciding on
awards of research grants?

On each and every issue, the loyalty test is what matters and not the
merits of the case. Final decisions are all made based on the loyalty
only. This will cause irreparable loss to our country.

Trump and his administration care little about expertise as evidenced
by his appointments most recently of Ms. Halligan. He also cares
little about science or even the scientific method as evidenced by his
appointment of RFKJr to lead HHS. Thus it is not surprising that he is
willing to dismantle the spectacular US public scientific research
industry.  I have served as a Program Officer at NSF. Grant
applications reviewed at my panels were judged on two criteria,
scientific merit and broader impacts, with the former being
paramount. Peer reviewers and panelists were very rigorous in
evaluating scientific merit. I was pleasantly surprised when I saw
that sloppy proposals from big labs were not ranked as highly as a
tight proposal from a younger investigator.  The broader impacts
criterion was twofold: educationg the lay public about the value of
the research and training the next generation of scientists. Proposals
that had a poor description of their broader impacts did not fare as
well. We were often faced with proposals that scored 4 excellent
reviews or 3 excellent and 1 very good. With a limited budget, they
could not all be funded. Thus, the broader impacts often separated
those that got an award from those that did not.  However, a strong
broader impacts portion of a proposal never saved a proposal that was
weak on merit. It now sounds like Trump wants to devalue merit in
favor of loyalty to his view of white Christian exceptionalism. Just
watch as China, South Korea, Japan, Germany and other countries pass
us by in scientific achievement.

This plan is an excellent way to drive the most talented researchers
to foreign universities. Very few brilliant scientists will choose to
have their research proposals accepted or denied based on political
ideology when they could go elsewhere and have them evaluated based on
scientific merit and promise. China has already surpassed the US in
some areas of science. This will accelerate their advance and our
decline.

Seems like many in the comments didn’t read the article. Universities
should be required to not consider race in admissions or hiring, and
universities should also be held to account for pushing out students
with few job prospects and too much debt.

    Call it a smoke screen. Call it gas lighting. Call it anything you
    want except what this administration calls it which is DEI or
    antisemitism. It’s not either. What Trump wants is for
    universities to fall in line which he is attempting to do as in
    every sphere including the federal government and civil
    society. If successful the country will end up being an empty
    shell of itself and a pariah state in the world.
  
    It’s seems as though you aren’t comprehending events. Trump and
    his minions are all in on government viewpoint
    discrimination. This is another shot at bringing to heel what they
    consider to be “liberal” institutions.

    Funny..I am not aware of any US university that requires students
    to have a particular major. Students choose their own majors in
    the US academic system. IF A STUDENT ENDS UP WITH A MAJOR THAT HAS
    LOWER JOB PROSPECTS, THE STUDENT MADE THAT CHOICE, NOT THE
    UNIVERSITY.

    Students come to the University to learn what they want to learn,
    "I would found an institution where any student can find
    instruction in any subject." Ezra Cornell. Our job is to teach and
    let the graduates do with it as they will.

Something had to be done. For many decades, colleges and universities
have been bastions of left wing, secular, anti-religious thought and
curriculum. William F. Buckley wrote of this problem in 1951, "God and
Man at Yale". It's gotten much worse since then. Also there should not
be DEI or racial quotas in hiring or admissions. The nation is going
in a new, more conservative direction now.

    what Trump does is not at all conservative. it is radical and
    authoritarian. Conservatives opposed gigantic power grabs by the
    executive. Calling Trump conservative is a joke.

    Funny how knowledge makes one more critical and
    enlightened. That's considered liberal.

    Hmmmm…maybe a greater knowledge of the world gained through
    education just makes you realize the limitations and hypocrisies
    of “conservatism.”

    Yes, there is a clear bias at universities in favor of facts,
    science, and basic human rights. And there should be. Universities
    are not churches.

Sure the Trump admin has a hammer, but this won't nail the "woke
humanities" -- it will smash the extraordinary U.S. scientific
research enterprise. A university is a collection of different
colleges, which is a collection of departments and programs, each with
their own graduate admission and faculty recruiting
policies. Universities are also middle men for federally sponsored
research grants -- they have research money the way an accountant or
bank has money.  Of course all practices must be consistent with the
law! But beyond that, there is a huge amount of heterogeneity and none
of this is really coupled together. For instance, my biophysics
research grant might be less competitive because of legal actions by
our English department that the Trump administration just doesn't
like. I have no control over the English department, the English
department won't see the funding, and none of the graduate students
being funded by the grant will have any interaction with the English
department. So nothing will change except that STEM funding will
become more random and less meritocratic.

NIH, DOD and other federal research grants have long had non
scientific conditions that “increase priority.” To say otherwise is
uninformed at best, and intentionally deceptive at worst.  This
proposal allegedly moves the responsibility for these nonscientific
elements to the schools rather than research teams, which is a
positive change. I agree with the Berkeley professor in that this
could be much ado about nothing if it’s just a reassertion that the
institution is following the law. The reported criteria would fall
into that category.  More broadly, the variability in nonscientific
requirements in grants puts up a significant barrier to new research
groups’ attempts to establish themselves. It fosters the creation of
dynasties that are well resourced enough to accommodate the shifting
requirements, reducing the importance of novel ideas and scientific
merit through the use of process mandates.

    Although this comment shows some insight into the grant award
    process, it misses the big picture. The Trump administration is
    not interested in improving the grant process to include a more
    deserving group of grantees. Instead it is actually trying to
    shrink the pool of grantees to include only those who adhere to
    the MAGA conservative mindset. Academic freedom be
    damned. Societal interest be damned. Just look at other areas
    where this administration is aggressively reigning in support for,
    or aggressively opposing those it doesn’t agree with.

So much of what is happening is very reminiscent of Chairman Mao and
his Great Leap Forward, an ambitious and ultimately disastrous
economic campaign in China from 1958 to 1962 He also reorder China's
education system in the 60's. In a nutshell he stopped all education
for approximately 10 years and sent professors to reeducation camps
and moved the peasant class into training to take over the science,
medicine and tech areas of education. He ordered musical instruments
confiscated and when the music began again it was state controlled. He
ordered the production of his official portraits, He had ongoing
influence on contemporary art and Chinese politics during this period.
As a result in the colleges lessons that were not approved were taught
in secret and a brain drain began as the intellectuals left the
country. Many coming to the US to teach at acupuncture colleges
springing up in the 80s and 90's These TCM doctors had a medical
degree in western medicine as well in China but not recognized in the
US. Many went on to get that degree here by going US medical
schools. I know this because I was an apprentice to one of these
doctors.  This is not a road we want to go down. It leads to financial
ruin for those that live through it.

I am sure that this new policy will bring about a culture of
excellence at our universities similar to what we are seeing in the
current administration.

Not only is this plan discriminatory, it is shortsighted: imagine a
reversal of ideological favor when Democrats are in power. They would
not pursue such a plan, but questions of precedent and unintended
consequences are always important to consider. Of course, if you have
no interest in formulating responsible public policy conducive to the
common good and care nothing for posterity or the judgment of history,
then such a plan would seem perfectly sensible--which explains the
Trump administration's concoction of it.

The purpose of a college education should be to get an education, NOT
To get a job. There is no area of study that is not worthy. There is
no such thing “ Frivolous” Degree. Choosing any major and achieving a
degree, is in the control of the student.

So the Trump administration is going to dump the system that has
piloted the US to a top source of scientific merit in the world?

The uncomfortable truth is that many of America’s brightest
undergraduates don’t choose careers in science because they’re chasing
economic stability in medicine, law, or finance. To keep our labs
thriving, we’ve relied on drawing the best and most ambitious students
from across the globe. Simply look at the faculty of any STEM
department at a major University.  But what happens if they stop
coming? If top-tier students from India, China, Europe, or Africa
decide the U.S. is no longer a welcoming or stable environment, our
pipeline collapses. Universities will struggle to recruit. Companies
will be stuck with a narrower talent pool, forced to either relocate
their research overseas or pass the costs of diminished innovation
onto consumers. And the most accomplished professors and
researchers—who can work anywhere—will think long and hard about
whether staying in the U.S. is worth it when opportunities abroad are
expanding.  This is the risk Trump is playing with. By undermining
academic freedom and turning research funding into a political loyalty
test, he’s not just waging a cultural war—he’s mortgaging our future
in science, technology, and economic leadership. If we cripple the
very system that has made the U.S. the world’s innovation hub, we
won’t just lose prestige. We’ll lose the industries, the jobs, and the
breakthroughs that secure our global standing. And once that edge is
gone, it’s not easily won back.

The autocratic playbook continues apace. Trump and his minions are
acting with the surety there will not be any free and fair elections
going forward. Their actions destroying free speech, controlling the
unfettered discussion of ideas in our universities, establishing a
military presence on our cities under false pretenses, using trumped
up charges against political enemies and condoning corruption and self
enrichment, are not actions taken to bolster our democracy. They are
concerted actions that consolidate power over Americans in
perpetuity. The time to make a stand is now, before this monster
declares martial law and removes our freedoms. Because, dear folks,
that is Trump's end game.


OCTOBER 

10/3/25:  Van Scoyoc newsletter.

NIH research grinds to a halt as government shuts down 

As the U.S. government shuts down due Congress' failure to pass a
spending bill, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) is implementing
a contingency staffing plan that will again roil a research apparatus
that has already been heavily disrupted during the second Trump
administration. The NIH will retain 4,477, or 24.5%, of its staff
during the shutdown, primarily to maintain operations at the NIH
Clinical Center, which is a hospital run by the agency, according to
the plan. Other employees will stick around to care for lab animals or
perform upkeep for infrastructure and facilities. In total, 32,460
employees across the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
will be furloughed during the shutdown, according to an HHS
contingency plan. Read more:  Fierce Biotech

After months in limbo, four NIH institute directors fired 

Four institute directors at the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and another top agency official who have been in professional limbo
since being placed on administrative leave in the spring have now been
fired, ScienceInsider has learned. They are Jeanne Marrazzo, director
of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID),
who in a recently filed federal whistleblower complaint says her
removal was for political reasons; Diana Bianchi, director of the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development; Eliseo
Pérez-Stable, who directed the National Institute on Minority Health
and Health Disparities; Shannon Zenk, director of the National
Institute of Nursing Research; and NIH Deputy Director for Program
Coordination, Planning, and Strategic Initiatives Tara Schwetz. All
received letters from NIH or the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS), its parent agency, in the past few days informing them
that their appointments had expired or were being terminated. Read
more:  Science Magazine

DOE cancels $7.6 billion in funding meant for projects 

The U.S. Department of Energy on Wednesday said it planned to cancel
$7.56 billion in financing for hundreds of energy projects that it
said would not provide sufficient returns to taxpayers. In a statement
issued late on Wednesday, the DOE said it would cancel 321 financial
awards supporting 223 projects. According to a list of all 321
terminated awards obtained by Latitude Media, EVERY SINGLE CANCELED
AWARD WAS FOR A PROJECT LED BY A COMPANY BASED IN A DEMOCRAT-LED
STATE. The canceled funding ranges from several hundred million
dollars for projects focused on reducing methane emissions from oil
and gas operators to a $50 million grant for National Grid to add
distributed energy resources to the Massachusetts electric grid. Read
more: Reuters, Latitude Media

Energy Dept. tells employees not to use words including 'climate change' and
'green' 

The Department of Energy has told employees to avoid using certain
words, including "climate change," "green" and "sustainable,"
according to an internal email sent to staff and obtained by NPR. The
details of the email were first reported by Politico. It was sent to
employees of the Energy Department's Office of Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy, which is the largest federal funder of clean energy
technology. Read more:  NPR

DOE announces $625 million for ‘beautiful, clean coal’ and gas 

The U.S.  Department of Energy on Monday announced $625 million in
funding aimed at retrofitting and recommissioning coal
plants. “Beautiful, clean coal will be essential to powering America’s
reindustrialization and winning the AI race,” Energy Secretary Chris
Wright said in a statement. The agency did not immediately respond to
questions about the funding mechanism, including whether it would be
made available as loans or grants. Read more:  Utility Drive

NASA closes doors to 15,000 employees as US government shutdown begins 

More than 15,000 NASA civil servants have been furloughed as the
U.S. federal government enters a shutdown. The grinding halt forces
NASA and other agencies to scale back nearly all of their day-to-day
operations after lawmakers in Washington D.C. failed to pass a
government funding bill by the deadline. Only a fraction of NASA's
workforce remains on duty, assigned to missions that cannot be paused
without risking astronaut safety, critical hardware, or the Trump
administration’s highest priorities. With most science programs and
public-facing activities frozen, the shutdown leaves NASA in a holding
pattern until Congress approves new funding. Read more:  Space.com  

Report argues NASA is illegally using President’s Budget Request to circumvent
Congress 

A new report from the Democratic staff of the U.S. Senate Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation (CST) argues that NASA has been
“illegally” implementing President Donald Trump’s proposed budget
request (PBR) and ignoring the funding levels previously approved by
Congress. Read more:  Spaceflight Now



10/3/25: FYI Subject: Democrats Accuse Administration of Cutting
 Spending at NASA and NOAA

Senate Democrats this week accused the Trump administration of illegally
restricting spending at NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

A report published on Monday by Democrats on the Senate Commerce,
Science and Transportation Committee claims that White House Office of
Management and Budget Director Russell Vought directed NASA in early
summer to begin implementing spending levels outlined in President
Donald Trump’s fiscal year 2026 budget request — a claim which NASA
leadership denies.

President Trump’s budget request proposed approximately $18.8 billion
for NASA, a sharp drop from the fiscal year 2025 enacted level of
$24.8 billion.  Whistleblowers quoted in the Democrats’ report said
they were told to “get in line with the presidential budget request or
lose their job or position.” They also raised safety concerns in
relation to reduced spending. One whistleblower said they were “very
concerned that we’re going to see an astronaut death within a few
years” because of the Trump administration’s “chainsaw approach” to
the agency. Another whistleblower quoted in the report said there is
“no efficiency and no strategy” to the budget cuts, stating: “it’s a
dart board in a dark room where darts are being thrown at random and
hitting people.”

“The report is false,” NASA Associate Administrator Amit Kshatriya
said in a statement shared with FYI. “NASA has communicated openly and
transparently with Congress that we continue to execute our available
appropriated funding in accordance with established fiscal policies
which respect congressional authorities,” Kshatriya said. “NASA will
never compromise on safety. The president’s budget request stands with
Congress at this point, and NASA will enact the budget appropriated to
us,” he added.  The committee report focused on NASA, but it also
asserts that there is “no doubt the Trump administration is trying to
execute similar plans at agencies across the federal government.”

Senate Democrats also raised concerns about spending at NOAA this
week, with Sens. Chris Van Hollen (D-MD) and Adam Schiff (D-CA)
sharing a letter they wrote to Vought demanding answers on agency
spending in recent months.  The senators asked why NOAA’s fiscal year
2025 spending plan, reportedly approved by OMB in August, was $246
million less than what Congress directed.  Much like at NASA, these
cuts put spending at NOAA roughly in line with the funding cuts
President Donald Trump proposed in his fiscal year 2026 budget request
for the agency. 

NOAA did not respond to a request for comment on the letter, but
staffing is currently reduced due to the government shutdown.  Van
Hollen and Schiff’s letter suggests budget cuts at NOAA have affected
research labs, competitive research grants, cooperative institutes,
and fisheries management programs — actions that “will lead to
environmental damage, economic loss, and social harm across the
nation,” the senators wrote.  It remains unclear exactly how much
money President Trump has delayed, withheld, canceled, or clawed back
from federal agencies and programs over the course of his second term,
but Democrats on the House Appropriations Committee estimate that the
figure exceeds $410 billion.

An analysis published by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a
think tank that studies state and federal budgets, found that, as of
July 31, the Trump administration had delayed or blocked the
distribution of approximately $26 billion in funds approved in the
fiscal year 2025 stopgap funding bill, which Congress approved in
March.

These funding freezes, known as impoundments, targeted agencies and
programs that did not align with Trump administration priorities, the
CBPP report says.  The accounts with the largest delays include
health-focused agencies, such as the National Institutes of Health and
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; agencies that the
Trump administration has targeted for elimination, such as the
Institute of Museum and Library Services; and foreign assistance
programs.

While the deadline for federal agencies to spend or commit funding for
fiscal year 2025 passed on Sept. 30, reporting by Nature suggests NIH
was able to overcome delays and obligate most of its fiscal year 2025
funding before the deadline, assuaging fears that the agency would
have to return billions of dollars in unspent funds.


10/6/25:  FYI

TRUMP THREATENS FURTHER AGENCY CUTS AS SHUTDOWN CONTINUES

The government shutdown continues this week, with Republicans and
Democrats still at an impasse over healthcare spending. The Senate is
expected to vote again at 5:30 pm today on the continuing resolution
agreement that the House passed in September. Senate Republicans need
60 votes to pass the CR and will need the support of at least eight
Democrats or independents, but only a few have indicated a willingness
to support the CR in prior votes. The Senate will continue to meet
this week, but the House is not scheduled to resume meetings until
after Columbus Day.

The Trump administration has warned it may use the shutdown to make
cuts to federal agencies and implement widespread federal
layoffs. President Donald Trump met with White House Budget Director
Russell Vought last week to “determine which of the many Democrat
Agencies, most of which are a potential SCAM, he recommends to be cut,
and whether or not those cuts will be temporary or permanent,” Trump
wrote on Truth Social last Thursday. That same day, the Department of
Energy announced the termination of more than 300 grants totaling more
than $7 billion. Many of the projects focused on clean and renewable
energy, with cancellations impacting two major hydrogen hub projects,
per reporting by E&E News.

Vought tweeted a list of states – all of which voted Democratic in the
last presidential election – where projects have been
cancelled. Democratic leaders have described the cuts as illegal and
politically motivated. “This administration has had plans in the works
for months to cancel critical energy projects, and now, they are
illegally taking action to kill jobs and raise people’s energy bills,”
said Sen. Patty Murray (D-WA), the top Democrat on the Senate
Appropriations Committee, in a statement. (This May, Energy Secretary
Chris Wright began a large-scale review of DOE-funded projects to
identify candidates for cancellation.)

Just prior to the shutdown, the Office of Management and Budget
directed federal agencies to consider reductions in force, in addition
to standard furloughs, as part of their shutdown plans. Intramural
research at science agencies has been largely paused, but whether the
shutdown has triggered new staff RIFs remains unclear.

TRUMP OFFERS FUNDING ADVANTAGE DEAL TO SMALL GROUP OF UNIVERSITIES

The Trump administration sent a proposal to nine universities last
week asking them to adopt certain conservative priorities in exchange
for priority access to federal grants, looser restraints on overhead
costs, invitations to White House events, and conversations with
administration officials.

Signatories to the 10-page “compact” would commit to maintaining
“institutional neutrality” at all levels, ensuring university
employees abstain from political speech, and recognizing that
“academic freedom is not absolute.” The compact also requires
signatories to conduct surveys of “viewpoints among faculty, students,
and staff at all levels” and publicly publish the results.

Signatories would be required to cap international enrollment at 15%
for undergraduates, with no more than 5% from a single country. They
would also freeze tuition for five years, with free tuition awarded to
students in “hard science” programs at institutions with endowments
exceeding $2 million per undergraduate student. The compact prohibits
signatories from considering gender, race, or political ideology in
admissions. It also requires institutions to provide single-sex spaces
for women and strictly define sex and gender according to
“reproductive function and biological processes.”

The compact has drawn criticism from Democrats, with California
Gov. Gavin Newsom threatening to pull state funding from any
California institution that signs the agreement. In a statement,
Newsom said that California will not “BANKROLL SCHOOLS THAT SELL OUT
THEIR STUDENTS, PROFESSORS, RESEARCHERS, AND SURRENDER ACADEMIC
FREEDOM.”

Most of the universities that received the proposal have not publicly
shared a response, but Kevin Eltife, chairman of the University of
Texas System Board of Regents, reportedly said he was honored the
system’s flagship school was selected for potential funding
advantages.


10/7/25:  FYI

Shutdown May Prolong Grant Lawsuits and Reinstatements

The government shutdown is slowing some court proceedings over
research grant terminations. Justice Department attorneys moved to
delay various court deadlines related to restoring grants to Harvard
University and the University of California because government
attorneys are generally prohibited from working during the
shutdown. The judges have so far granted short-term extensions for
those deadlines, which DOJ attorneys still may not be able to meet if
the shutdown continues beyond this week.

Proceedings also appear to have stalled in several other cases related
to grant terminations and indirect cost caps. For some, no appeal has
been filed, while others await hearings.

In the Harvard case, the judge directed the Trump administration to
reverse more than $2.6 billion in federal funding cuts in early
September but left it to Harvard and the administration to jointly
establish “implementation details” before issuing the final
judgment. Following the shutdown, the judge extended the deadline for
a status report to Oct. 10.

President Donald Trump said the administration would “immediately
appeal” the decision against it in the Harvard case.

In the UC case, university researchers won a temporary restoration of
grant funding, including two separate rounds of grant reinstatements
from the National Science Foundation — one in June and one in August —
and another ongoing tranche of reinstatements from the National
Institutes of Health and the Department of Defense. The appellate
court granted a stay in the administration’s appeal to overturn the
temporary restoration of funds, while the district court extended the
deadlines to restore all grants to Oct. 10 for NIH and to Oct. 17 for
DOD.  On top of the furloughed attorneys, the ability of federal
agencies to service grants — including restoring funds to those that
courts have ordered reinstated — appears to be hampered. Agencies
including NIH and NSF say in their shutdown plans that researchers may
continue work on current awards but the agencies will not award any
new grants. Like DOJ staff, most employees at science agencies are
furloughed during a government shutdown and are not permitted to work,
even voluntarily. 

NIH and NSF’s plans both indicate that staff may not be available to
provide oversight or administrative support, even of existing grants,
and one court filing from DOJ specifies that NIH’s grant office staff
are furloughed.  A Harvard spokesperson said on Sept. 19 that the
Department of Health and Human Services had returned $46 million in
research funding to the university. This amounts to less than 2% of
the total funding to be restored. FYI has reached out to Harvard for
an update.

For the UC system, NIH had already restored 52 grants to researchers
before the shutdown and planned to review nine remaining grants for
potential reinstatement by Oct. 3, while DOD planned to reinstate all
grants by Oct. 10.


10/10/25: IHE.  MIT Rejects Proposed Federal Compact / MIT is the
  first institution to reject a proposal by the Trump administration
  that would trade preferential treatment on federal funding for
  far-reaching changes.

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology has rejected the Trump
administration’s proposal to sign on to the “Compact for Academic
Excellence in Higher Education," which would mandate sweeping changes
across campus in exchange for preferential treatment on federal
funding.

MIT is the first of the nine universities invited to join the compact
to publicly reject the proposal, which has ignited fierce pushback
from other higher ed leaders, faculty and experts who see the document
as a way to strip institutions of their autonomy. The Trump
administration also asked Brown University, Dartmouth College, the
University of Arizona, the University of Pennsylvania, the University
of Southern California, the University of Texas at Austin, the
University of Virginia and Vanderbilt University to sign. Most have
provided vague statements saying that they are reviewing the compact,
though Texas officials have expressed some enthusiasm about the offer.

MIT president Sally Kornbluth announced the move in a Friday morning
letter <https://orgchart.mit.edu/letters/regarding-compact> to the
campus community, which included a copy of her response to Education
Secretary Linda McMahon.

Kornbluth highlighted a number of areas the White House had emphasized
in the compact, such as focusing on merit, keeping costs low for
students and protecting free expression.

“These values and other MIT practices meet or exceed many standards
outlined in the document you sent. We freely choose these values because
they’re right, and we live by them because they support our mission—work
of immense value to the prosperity, competitiveness, health and security
of the United States. And of course, MIT abides by the law,” Kornbluth
wrote.

She also noted that MIT disagreed with a number of the demands in the
letter, arguing that it “would restrict freedom of expression and our
independence as an institution” and that “the premise of the document is
inconsistent” with MIT’s belief that funding should be based on merit.

“In our view, America’s leadership in science and innovation depends on
independent thinking and open competition for excellence,” Kornbluth
wrote. “In that free marketplace of ideas, the people of MIT gladly
compete with the very best, without preferences. Therefore, with
respect, we cannot support the proposed approach to addressing the
issues facing higher education.”

Neither the White House nor the Department of Education responded to
requests for comment.

Kornbluth has weathered searing criticism in recent years, both by
Republican lawmakers and the broader public, after a disastrous
congressional hearing in late 2023 over how universities handled
pro-Palestinian protests and concerns about antisemitism.

She was one of three presidents, including former leaders of Harvard
University and Penn, who offered equivocating answers when asked about
hypothetical calls for the genocide of Jews and whether that would
violate institutional policies. Kornbluth, who is Jewish, was somewhat
more direct with her answers and the only one of the three to keep her
job following the hearing.


    Where Do Others Stand?

While MIT is the first institution to outright reject the compact,
others have indicated they may be leaning that way.

Dartmouth president Sian Leah Beilock, for example, issued a statement
last week saying she was “deeply committed to Dartmouth’s academic
mission and values and will always defend our fierce independence.”
The university “will never compromise our academic freedom and our
ability to govern ourselves,” she wrote. While some observers have
read Beilock’s statement as a rejection of the compact, Dartmouth
spokesperson Jana Barnello rebutted that notion.

Barnello told /Inside Higher Ed/ by email that deliberations continue as
administrators are “engaging with faculty across the university through
Dartmouth’s shared governance framework and working closely with the
Board of Trustees.”

Officials in Texas —- where concerns about academic freedom and
political interference in the classroom are surging —- have publicly
welcomed the idea. UT system Board of Regents chairman Kevin
P. Eltife, a former Republican lawmaker, wrote in an Oct. 2 statement
that the university was “honored” to be among the nine institutions
“selected by the Trump Administration for potential funding
advantages” and the board looked forward to “reviewing the compact
immediately.”

Some state government officials are aiming to make the university’s
decision for them by threatening financial consequences if they sign
onto the proposed compact. California governor Gavin Newsom was the
first to do so warning that any institution in the state that signs
the agreement will lose funding, including access to scholarship funds
known as Cal Grants.

Virginia Democrats made a similar threat to scale back state funding
in a letter to UVA, to which the University of Virginia Board of
Visitors offered a vague and noncommittal response.  A working group
at UVA is studying the proposal even as officials have expressed
concerns. Pennsylvania lawmakers have also spoken out against the
compact.

Boards for both the UT system and UVA are heavily stocked with GOP
donors and figures.


    Reactions Pour In

The same day MIT rejected the compact, the Association of American
Universities (which all nine institutions are members of) voiced
concerns about the proposal.

While AAU president Barbara Snyder noted in a statement there are some
principles in the compact that the organization agrees with, such as
making higher education more affordable and accessible and fostering “a
vibrant marketplace of ideas,” other points were concerning.
Specifically, Snyder pointed to concerns that the proposal “could
damage, compromise, or depart from our nation’s competitive, merit-based
system of research grant funding” that has been in place for more than a
half century. 

“While we cannot compromise the foundational principles that have
made—and will continue to make—American higher education the envy of
the world, we would welcome the opportunity to work with the
administration to reimagine the important partnership between the
federal government and research universities,” Snyder wrote in
Friday’s statement.

MIT’s rejection of the compact prompted celebration in academic circles.

“I am proud to say that MIT has rejected Trump’s poison compact,”
American Association of University Professors president Todd Wolfson
wrote on Bluesky shortly after the news broke.

And some scholars suggested that MIT had established a precedent that
others may look to. Brendan Cantwell, a higher education professor at
Michigan State University, questioned in a post on Bluesky whether
MIT’s action changes “the calculus” for the other eight universities.

“The language MIT uses does put the onus on all universities that accept
to explain how they are not surrendering academic freedom and
institutional independence,” Cantwell wrote.

Some lawmakers also applauded MIT for rejecting the compact.

“This is what courage in the face of authoritarianism looks like. No
university should take Trump’s bribe & surrender their
integrity—bending the knee to a bully only feeds the beast & puts ALL
our rights at risk,” Sen. Chris Van Hollen, a Maryland Democrat, wrote
in a post on X.  He encouraged others to follow MIT’s example in
rejecting the administration’s demands.

But some Trumpworld figures hinted that there may be retaliation ahead
for MIT.  “It’s time for MIT to be held accountable for their
noncompliance. We have a pending lawsuit,” Kenneth L. Marcus, a former
Department of Education official in the first Trump administration,
wrote in a post , tagging Harmeet Dhillon, the assistant attorney
general for civil rights at the Department of Justice, who is playing
a growing role in the pressure campaign against universities.

Comments from NYT article on MIT rejection...

   --- Overwhelmingly approve of MIT's rejection of the compact.
       Some threaten to stop contributing to U Texas.

...I am not surprised to learn that MIT has flatly refused to bow to
extortionate, anti-intellectual demands. I plead with every other
institution of higher learning in the U.S. to join them in saying no
to such Stalinist tactics, and am deeply grateful MIT for its
leadership in this terrifying time.

...For those of us who remember history, Europe was effectively lost
because of appeasement.

I don't know how anyone who claims to be "conservative" can read this
list of demands with anything but revulsion.  The government telling
institutions how to run themselves, how to run their finances, what to
teach, and to police free speech are 100% repugnant. They are NOT
American values. They are authoritarian or fascist. Take your
pick. Even worse, it has been shown that these attacks are bullying
tactics, and like every bullying tactic, if you actually give in to
the bully, they will just be back to bully you again.

So the guy who had to pay a $20 million dollar judgement for running a
fake university wants institutions such as MIT to do what he wants.

Conservative ideas belittle themselves. Loudly. Constantly. I am a 70
year old white women and cannot think of any conservative idea that
has benefitted me. Even their tough on crime campaign slogan failed to
prevent me being attacked by a man released early due to overcrowded
prisons (GOP failed to fund prisons, trying to create for profit
prisons for their investors instead)

Conservative here. Good for M.I.T. they made a wise choice. I dislike
a whole bunch about these Universities but signing a Stalin-like
thought control manifesto is not how America works. Trump is no
Conservative. He is a freakish alien to Conservatism and supporting
him means you have lost your Conservative Soul. End of story.

Let's start with the fact that the architect of this "agreement" is a
hedge fund guy MARC ROWAN (see guest essay Oct.10, 2025 -- copy
captured). Taking advice on education from wall street elites is
laughable. Wealth does not imbue wisdom or integrity, just look at
Elon Musk.  Second, I guess the Republicans are no longer for free
enterprise (extorting equity stakes from corporations Intel and Nippon
Steel), science based health care (the destruction of the department
of HHS), destruction of strategic relationships with our global
allies, the co-opting of our justice system and last but not least
free speech and the unencumbered pursuit of knowledge.  Trump, Rowan,
Bessent, Lutnick, Kennedy...its a long list, are playing tennis on
someone else's court. They are like the drunk at the end of the bar
who has an uneducated opinion about everything and doesn't mind
shouting them in a loud voice.  Culture wars as a means of diverting
attention from a debauched Republican party, devoid of any principles
or policy ideas is a sad movie. Unfortunately my kids have to stick
around for the ending.

  [MARC ROWAN, according to "Republic Report": "Billionaire Behind
  Trump Pressure Campaign on Colleges Owns Predatory University of
  Phoenix...  a school with a record of deceiving, over-charging, and
  under-educating students, leaving graduates and drop-outs alike with
  overwhelming debt....The University of Phoenix has received tens of
  billions from federal taxpayers for student grants and loans, at
  times more than $2 billion in a single year. It reported $950
  million in income last year — 88 percent of that from federal
  taxpayers. But the school has posted abysmal graduation rates —
  currently listed by the U.S. Department of Education as just 25
  percent and for many years, and many programs, far worse than
  that. According to the education department, only 10 percent of
  former Phoenix students have paid off their student loans or are
  even making progress in doing so.""]



10/13/25:  NASA Watch.  JPL Announce 550 Layoffs

Keith’s note: In a “A message from JPL Director Dave Gallagher” a JPL
layoff of 500 people has been announced that is “not related to the
current government shutdown”. Full memo below:

“In order to best position JPL going forward, we are taking steps to
restructure and establish an appropriate size to ensure future
success. As part of this effort, JPL is undergoing a realignment of
its workforce, including a reduction in staff. This reduction — part
of a reorganization that began in July and not related to the current
government shutdown — will affect approximately 550 of our colleagues
across technical, business, and support areas. Employees will be
notified of their status on Tuesday, Oct. 14. Over the past few
months, we have communicated openly with employees about the
challenges and hard choices ahead. This week’s action, while not easy,
is essential to securing JPL’s future by creating a leaner
infrastructure, focusing on our core technical capabilities,
maintaining fiscal discipline, and positioning us to compete in the
evolving space ecosystem — all while continuing to deliver on our
vital work for NASA and the nation. We are grateful for the
contributions of our departing colleagues, whose work has advanced
exploration and innovation in ways that benefit us all.”

Full memo:

Colleagues,

For the past few months, I have communicated openly about our need to
create a streamlined infrastructure that enables us to operate more
efficiently, make decisions more quietly, and remain competitive in
our rapidly changing environment. We continue to take thoughtful but
necessary steps now to shape the Lab for the future.

As part of this organizational realignment, we are taking steps to
restructure and establish an appropriate size to ensure future
success. I’m sharing the difficult news that JPL will be conducting a
workforce action tomorrow, Oct, 14, resulting in a layoff of
approximately 550 colleagues, or 11% of our workforce. This reduction
is part of a reorganization that began in July and not related to the
current government shutdown. Unless otherwise notified, all personnel
are required to work remotely tomorrow.

Following the workforce action, those continuing with JPL will be
notified of their role in the new Lab structure, which will become
effective Wednesday, Oct. 15.

Please watch this short video from me (see here) with a message about
these changes and the path ahead. Within the same link, you will find
more information, Including resources and frequently asked
questions. At 8:30 a.m. tomorrow, we will host a short, virtual
Lab-wide meeting to share what to expect related to the layoff. A
calendar invitation will be sent later today.

I recognize this is a tremendous amount of change in a short period of
time and will be challenging for our entire community in the coming
weeks. While not easy, I believe taking these actions now will help
the Lab transform at the scale and pace necessary to help achieve
humanity’s boldest ambitions in space.

To our colleagues who will be leaving JPL, thank you for your many
contributions to the Lab, our community, NASA, and the nation. We are
truly grateful for your service, advancing exploration and innovation
in ways that benefit us all.

To everyone, I encourage you to take advantage of the resources
available through the Human Resources site, including our Employee
Assistance Program and more.

Please take care in the days ahead and continue to show the kindness,
respect, and support that define this community.


10/14/25:  Eos.  JPL Workforce Decimated 

Today, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, Calif.,
laid off 550 people, a roughly 11% reduction of its workforce.

...Gallagher said that this workforce reduction is part of a
reorganization that began in July and is not related to the current
government shutdown that began on 1 October. A 10 October court filing
by the White House Office of Management and Budget did not include
NASA among the agencies targeted for layoffs by the Trump
administration during the ongoing shutdown, reported Space News.

JPL is a research and development laboratory federally funded by
NASA. While the current government shutdown continues, NASA has been
directed to operate and plan as if the appropriations bill passed by
the House of Representative is in effect, which would fund NASA (and
most JPL projects) at nearly the same level as the current fiscal
year.

Federal whistleblowers, however, have come forward with evidence that
NASA leadership has been operating as if the President’s Budget
Request (PBR)—not the appropriations bill—is in effect, directing
mission wind-down operations and staff reductions under the assumption
of a 20% overall budget cut. Some of that lost spending would affect
JPL’s ability to plan, build, and operate Earth science missions and
space exploration spacecraft.

Despite vocal support from the Trump administration and NASA
leadership about putting humans on the Moon again and eventually on
Mars, the PBR would also cancel the Mars Sample Return program, which
would pick up and return to Earth sample capsules collected and
deposited by the Perseverance rover. Analysis of those samples would
provide critical support to any future human exploration mission to
Mars.

Kevin Hicks, a systems engineer who formerly operated rovers at JPL,
said that Perseverance’s budget is being reduced by two-thirds, “just
enough to technically keep it going and not get the full PR backlash
of canceling a working rover,” he wrote.

This is the fourth round of layoffs at JPL since the beginning of
2024, including an 8% reduction in staff that affected mostly
engineering-related positions. The mood among current and former JPL
employees is grim. Several people commented on a JPL Reddit forum that
they expect more layoffs in the future.  “Today was very somber on
lab. It felt like everyone [was] grieving,” one Redditor wrote on 13
October. Several other posters echoed that sentiment. “We tried to
keep a positive, but realistic attitude and we even took a final group
photo in front of the JPL concrete logo. However, there’s no
whitewashing the ‘doomsday-eve’ feeling that’s looming over all our
heads.”



10/16/25: IHE.  Colleges Push Back Against Trump’s Effort to Collect
   More Admissions Data / Institutions and advocates took issue with
   the proposal’s vague language and lack of privacy safeguards as
   well as the vast time and effort needed to collect the required
   data.

Institutions of higher education and their advocates are sounding the
alarm about the Trump administration’s plan to require colleges to
submit new data about their admissions decisions.

They argued in public comments that the new requirements for
admissions data collection are too vague, request data institutions do
not collect and could violate students’ privacy. Several institutions
said they broadly support transparency and the federal data collection
but that the department needs to rethink the proposal to lessen the
administrative burden on colleges and universities—especially smaller
institutions with limited institutional research capacity.

Under the Department of Education’s proposed Admissions and Consumer
Transparency Supplement, institutions would have to submit applied,
admitted and enrolled student data broken down by test score
quintiles, grade point average quintiles, income ranges, Pell Grant
eligibility and parental education levels, as well as data regarding
aid and student outcomes. Institutions would also be required to send
historical data going back to 2020.

President Donald Trump first called for this data to be collected in
an executive order, part of an ongoing crusade to stamp out racial
preference in admissions that experts say is going well beyond Supreme
Court’s 2023 ban on affirmative action. The announcement prompted
outcry from admissions professionals, who worried about whether their
institutions had the capacity to collect the required data and about
how the government planned to use the data.

The public comment period for the rule closed Tuesday, and the
department has to review and respond to the comments before finalizing
the changes. That process will likely be delayed because of the
government shutdown. The department has said it wants to put the
requirement in place starting with institutions’ annual submission of
enrollment data for the 2025–26 application cycle.

Once the rule is finalized, institutions would have just 120 days to
submit that data—a deadline that colleges said in comments would prove
difficult to meet. The Association for Institutional Research called
the proposed data survey “the single largest expansion in [Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System] history, adding more the 100 new
questions and roughly 10,000 data fields.” AIR said in its comment
that in a survey of 580 institutional research and other data
professionals, 91 percent of respondents said they would be unable to
provide the data by the given deadline and 88 percent of members said
that providing retrospective data would be “untenable” due to only
holding applicant data for a handful of years.

...Among the comments in opposition to the rule was a joint comment
from 18 Democratic attorneys general, who stressed that the data
collection went beyond the scope of the Supreme Court’s affirmative
action ban in Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard and would not
help reduce discrimination in the admissions process.  “SFFA does not
prohibit schools from pursuing diversity by lawful means. Nothing in
the Supreme Court’s decision restricts IHEs from embracing diversity
as an objective; indeed, the Court held that ‘[u]niversities may
define their missions as they see fit,’” they wrote. “Diversity is not
a symptom of discrimination; data showing that campuses maintained
diverse student populations after SFFA does not indicate a likelihood
of unlawful admissions practices.”

Nearly 90 percent of the more than 3,400 comments posted supported the
proposed rule, ALL USING NEAR-IDENTICAL LANGUAGE that reads, “As a
concerned citizen, I am worried about the appearance of continued
racial discrimination in college admissions. Universities that receive
our tax dollars have been repeatedly told that using race for
admissions decisions is illegal, yet it is unclear whether colleges
have gotten the message.” It’s unclear what the source of this comment
is, but it cites data from the right-wing nonprofit Defending
Education.

...Institutions also questioned the inclusion of several metrics that
would likely be difficult to standardize. In a comment, University of
Rochester provost Nicole Sampson wrote that high school GPA, for
example, is calculated differently at different high schools—some
using a weighted 5.0 scale, others only using an unweighted 4.0
scale—and has never previously been collected by IPEDS. Similarly,
some institutions have test-optional or even test-free admissions
policies, meaning they do not collect their applicants’ scores.

...Similarly, some comments noted that graduate admissions are
decentralized, often spread across professional schools and health
centers, and those different schools or departments may collect
different information.

A comment from the Association of American Universities also drew
attention to a slew of issues the department may face in interpreting
the data it has requested from universities, including the fact that
the majority of institutions consider many factors outside of GPA and
test scores when making an admissions decision.

...The association also noted that local priorities may shape
admissions decisions; in North Carolina, for example, no more than 18
percent of an incoming class may be out-of-state students, which may
result in lower test scores and GPAs from in-state students.

...Several commenters also suggested the department outline how it
will safeguard students’ privacy and proposed that the government
allocate funds to support institutions in their data
collection—especially as cuts to IPEDS staff have already made it more
difficult for colleges to complete their mandated data collection.


10/21/25: FYI 

Subject: COMMERCE MOVES TO TAKE CUT OF RESEARCH PATENTS / The agency
has opened the possibility in a recent funding announcement and
threatened to take control of Harvard’s patents.

Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick says he is looking to take a cut
from university patents that result from federally funded research,
going against the Bayh-Dole Act, a 1980 law that allows universities
full ownership of such patents.

In a September interview with Axios, Lutnick argued that taxpayers
should receive half the profit from university patents, comparing it
to fully funding a private business.

Once the government starts taking that 50% cut, Lutnick said, “our
social security system will be paid for and we won’t be a broke
country running $2 trillion deficits, because we’re the richest
country in the world, we’re just dopey,” adding, “We give away between
$200 and $300 billion a year in grants.”  Lutnick said every
U.S. university should be subject to such profit-sharing, with “a few
universities to start and then a master deal.” Lutnick sent a letter
to Harvard University in August regarding its patents and said he
planned to send another to the University of California system.

The administration has so far struck deals with Columbia University
and Brown University to restore federal funding and has been pursuing
other university deals, the latest being the “Compact for Academic
Excellence in Higher Education” offered first to nine higher ed
institutions and now open to all.  However, none of these mention
patents.

The Commerce Department began implementing new patent-related policies
soon after Lutnick’s interview, with the National Institute of
Standards and Technology issuing a broad funding solicitation for
which awardees may be required to issue royalties or otherwise share
revenue with the Commerce Department “to ensure a return on investment
to the government.”  In response to Lutnick’s remarks, the Bayh-Dole
Coalition, which advocates for protecting the legislation, said
taxpayers “already benefit greatly under the current system,” adding
that the law has enabled nearly $2 trillion in economic output,
supported 6.5 million jobs, and helped launch more than 19,000
startups since 1996.

The coalition added that lawmakers considered including a similar
profit-sharing model in early versions of the Bayh-Dole Act, but
abandoned it after federal agencies “correctly concluded” that it
would deter licensing and commercialization.

Stephen Ezell from the Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation think tank wrote in response to Lutnick’s remarks that the
federal government receives 20 times more in tax revenues from
university research parks than it would by taking half of university
royalty revenues. The government also benefits from the “extensive
innovations” produced and the tax revenue from “trillions in
industrial output and millions of jobs created as a result of
university tech transfer,” Ezell wrote.

However, some scholars have argued that the Bayh-Dole framework is
ineffective, causing universities to prioritize profits rather than
commercialization potential and even discouraging innovation
overall. A 2018 article from Issues in Science and Technology
theorizes that Bayh-Dole stifles biomedical innovation because the
resulting exclusive licensing agreements prevent other university and
industry scientists from using new basic knowledge. “More effective
innovation policies would provide incentives for universities to make
their commercializable discoveries freely available and to disseminate
them widely,” the article states.

More recently, witnesses testifying before the House Science Committee
have suggested that the Bayh-Dole framework needs improvement. “I
actually think that some of the federal laws with respect to
intellectual property need to change,” said Heather Wilson, president
of the University of Texas at El Paso, at a hearing in February. “From
my perspective, the value of the research as a university is in the
research and the development of the PhDs through doing research. We do
a lousy job of getting that IP out into companies. So things like
Bayh-Dole may actually limit the amount of research that can be
transferred out,” she added.

MARCH-IN ON HARVARD

The Bayh-Dole Coalition wrote a letter to President Donald Trump in
March asking him to reverse actions from the Biden administration that
infringe upon Bayh-Dole. Among these was a draft guidance from NIST
that would permit agencies to exercise their “march-in rights” if a
company’s product does not have a “reasonable” price. March-in rights,
which are established in the Bayh-Dole Act, allow the funding agency
to compel the patent owner or an exclusive licensee to grant a license
to third parties in specific circumstances.

The Trump administration has not rescinded the NIST
guidance. Moreover, Lutnick moved to exercise the Commerce
Department’s march-in rights in his August letter to Harvard,
potentially taking ownership of Harvard’s patents or granting licenses
to third parties. The letter asserts that Harvard has failed to comply
with regulations regarding timely disclosure and election of title,
preferencing U.S. industry, and taking “effective steps to achieve
practical applications of subject inventions.”

“If Harvard won’t honor the Bayh-Dole Act, then we will find someone
who will,” Lutnick wrote on X. Harvard has not issued a response.  The
Council for Innovation Promotion, a coalition focused on IP rights,
criticized the move, adding that no administration has exercised its
march-in rights before. “Just as no one would build a house on land
they might lose, innovators and entrepreneurs will not invest in
discoveries if their patent rights can be revoked at will,” C4IP
Executive Director Frank Cullen said in a statement.

Lutnick’s letter is just one element of the Trump administration’s
attacks on Harvard this year, which so far have included terminating
all of the university’s federal grants — which have since been
restored by court order— and considering debarment, which would
prevent the university from receiving any federal funding or
contracts.

Separately, other high-level members of the Trump administration have
floated ideas for using march-in rights for other purposes. In an
op-ed last year, Paul Dabbar and Ted Garrish, who now respectively
serve as deputy secretary of commerce and assistant secretary for
nuclear energy, suggested starting a China IP Initiative that would
use march-in rights to prevent Chinese entities from illegally
appropriating U.S. federally funded discoveries.



10/22/25: IHE.  ‘Because I Said So’: Universities Double Down on
  Unwritten Policies / A growing number of institutions are censoring
  faculty speech and instruction through murky verbal directives that
  sow fear and confusion. Can they be enforced?

In front of a few dozen faculty members at a town hall–style meeting
on Oct. 10, Angelo State University president Ronnie Hawkins said,
repeatedly, that new university policies prohibiting discussion of
transgender identity in class would not be written down.

“We have not put out any written guidance on that, but it’s tied to
that executive order that the president put out, and then also the
directive of the governor, and so that’s what makes it law for us to
have to follow here at Angelo State University,” Hawkins said,
referencing orders by President Donald Trump and Gov. Greg Abbott that
recognize only two genders—male and female. “But there’s no other
written types of documentation that we plan to be putting out that’s
tied to that.”

Angelo State, one of five institutions in the Texas Tech University
system, has been in the news for weeks over murky new directives,
passed down telephone-style from university leaders to deans to
faculty members, that prohibit faculty from acknowledging more than
two gender identities. The rules have confusing and widespread
implications; for example, faculty are unsure whether they can display
a pride flag in their own office, field student questions about
transgender identity or teach health-care students how to care for
someone who has had gender-confirmation surgery. The Oct. 10 town hall
didn’t clear anything up.

“Our general counsel has told us that at the system level, there’s no
gray area” in the law, Hawkins said at the town hall, according to a
recording Inside Higher Ed obtained. But none of the laws or orders
Hawkins referenced limit what faculty can legally teach about
gender. Texas House Bill 229, which Hawkins also cited during the town
hall, directs state institutions to use only male and female gender
options in state data collection, but it does not apply to academic
instruction. The president’s and governor’s executive orders are not
law. When asked by a faculty member whether the spoken directive
violates the university’s core values of “diversity and inclusion,”
Hawkins said it does not, because designing the core values “had
nothing to do with race. It had nothing to do with gender. It had
everything to do with us being a diverse university.” Regarding
whether or not to follow the directive, Hawkins told faculty members,
“If you don’t agree with that, you have a choice to make yourself.”

...other institutions have issued similar spoken rules.  So has the
University of North Florida, where university leaders verbally
instructed the College of Education dean to remove the words
“diversity, equity and inclusion” and “culture” from course
descriptions and learning objectives, and to bypass typical
institutional processes for changing course content.

...“All the [education] college deans are just scratching their heads
about this. It is not written anywhere, and it’s very clear in Florida
statute … that all laws and administrative rules be written and
published in order to be valid and enforceable,” Beasley said.

he new rule is likely a response to two Florida laws, faculty say. The
first, Florida House Bill 7, is currently blocked by a court order,
but if enforced it would significantly curtail how faculty members can
teach and speak about sex and gender. The law prohibits any
instruction or training that “espouses, promotes, advances,
inculcates, or compels a student or employee to believe” certain
“concepts” relating to race, color, national origin or sex. For
example, a lesson about structural sexism or racism would be
prohibited under the law. The second law, Florida House Bill 875,
which took effect in May, says that teacher-preparation courses “may
not distort significant historical events or include curriculum or
instruction that teaches identity politics, violates or is based on
theories that systemic racism, sexism, oppression, and privilege are
inherent in the institutions of the United States and were created to
maintain social, political, and economic inequities.”

Neither law specifically bans the terms “diversity, equity and
inclusion” or “culture” from course content, descriptions or
syllabi. Spokespeople for the Florida Board of Governors did not
respond to Inside Higher Ed’s request for comment.

...“Faculty are losing control over the curriculum,” Trapani
said. “Textbooks are just disappearing in the night. Assignments are
being changed, words are being changed, and we have no idea what’s
happening at any of our sister institutions. As we speak, there could
be some intransigence happening at University of Florida, and I have
no idea about what’s going on there, nor, probably, do the faculty at
large, because it happens in such small corridors with so few
officials involved.”

John White, an English professor...is pushing back hard on the new
directive. He filed a grievance with the faculty union, arguing that
“my academic freedom has been infringed by the university making me
change course materials via some kind of mandate from above that no
one can show me,” White said. Administrators changed course
descriptions and learning objectives over the summer without faculty
input, according to White. When faculty returned in the fall, they
were told to remove the terms from their syllabi as well, he added, or
else their course might not be approved by the department.

"I told the dean I would not change my syllabus, because I said, ‘I
want to actually read the administrative rule or the law that mandates
this … otherwise, we’re just going on hearsay, and I refuse to give up
my rights based upon hearsay,’” White said. “And they insisted that I
would be in trouble if I didn’t change it.”


10/23/25: 

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN
October 23, 2025

Union Lawsuit Challenges NASA National Security Rebrand
Lindsay McKenzie

The International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers
is suing the Trump administration over its attempt to end union
representation at NASA and rebrand the agency as an intelligence and
national security organization.  The IFPTE lawsuit, filed earlier this
month, challenges the White House’s assertion that national security
is NASA’s “primary function,” adding that NASA has been collectively
bargaining with IFPTE local unions for over 60 years and “at no time
has such bargaining ever been questioned as inconsistent with national
security.” It argues that President Donald Trump’s actions exceed his
authority and unfairly target the union, which has publicly protested
the administration’s cuts at the agency. IFPTE represents
approximately 6,000 employees at NASA.

The lawsuit follows an August executive order that bars some agencies
— including NASA and parts of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration — from engaging in collective bargaining on the grounds
that negotiating union contracts could hinder agencies’ ability to
operate effectively and quickly, creating a national security risk.

Trump’s order describes “intelligence, counterintelligence,
investigative, or national security work” as “a primary function” of
NASA and other agencies. An accompanying fact sheet states that NASA
“develops and operates advanced air and space technologies, like
satellite, communications, and propulsion systems, that are critical
for U.S. national security.”

Trump issued a related executive order in March directing most federal
agencies — including the National Science Foundation, most of the
Department of Energy, and parts of the Department of Health and Human
Services — to terminate their union contracts, citing a narrow legal
provision that allows the president to suspend collective bargaining
in the interest of national security.

Trump’s March order prompted swift legal challenges from multiple
unions representing federal workers, including IFPTE, which filed a
lawsuit on behalf of employees at the Department of Defense in
July. On Sept. 30, a federal judge issued a preliminary injunction
blocking the Trump administration from terminating the collective
bargaining rights of DOD workers represented by IFPTE, saying the
president had overstepped his authority. Some agencies not covered by
the injunction have reportedly terminated union contracts in line with
President Trump’s orders.

Other lawsuits filed in response to the August executive order are
ongoing, including one representing around 4,000 employees at NOAA’s
National Weather Service and the Office of Satellite Products and
Operations in the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and
Information Service.

The Trump administration’s framing of NASA as an intelligence and
national security agency has drawn criticism from space policy
experts, including Casey Dreier, chief of space policy at The
Planetary Society, who told Politico that the public’s relationship
with NASA will be “fundamentally changed for the worse if NASA is seen
as an extension of the national security apparatus, rather than a
projection of peaceful exploration and shared values.”

NASA was created by a 1958 law that designated it as a civilian agency
and specified that “activities peculiar to or primarily associated
with the development of weapons systems, military operations, or the
defense of the United States (including the research and development
necessary to make effective provision for the defense of the United
States) shall be the responsibility of, and shall be directed by, the
Department of Defense.” The law further states that U.S. space
activities “should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of
mankind.”

The creation of the Space Force in 2019 as a military branch
responsible for protecting U.S. interests in space also prompted
discussion about NASA’s role as a civilian agency for science and
exploration — a distinction that is reiterated on the Space Force
website. Some security experts argue, however, that NASA’s mission is
central to U.S. national security interests. Peter Garretson, a senior
fellow in defense studies at the American Foreign Policy Council,
wrote in a journal article last year that “NASA is a national security
organization whose duties include ensuring the pre-eminence of the
United States. Its job is not to build weapons or engage in
conflict—but to pursue American strategic objectives below the
threshold of armed conflict.”

NASA’s ties to the Department of Defense have separately drawn
criticism from Rep. Zoe Lofgren (D-CA), the top Democrat on the House
Science Committee. In a letter to acting NASA Administrator Sean Duffy
last month, Lofgren wrote that she has “serious concerns about NASA’s
developing relationship with the U.S. Air Force that will need to be
addressed.”

“NASA must remain focused on its mission as a civil space agency and a
scientific agency,” wrote Lofgren. “It cannot permit unrelated
priorities to distract it from its mission or impair its ability to
achieve its ambitious objectives in space for the benefit of humanity
here on Earth.”

 
10/31/25:  Halloween developments...Talk about scary! 

Van Scoyoc newsletter

Trump's surgeon general pick goes into labor before confirmation hearing 

   President Donald Trump's controversial pick for surgeon general,
   Casey Means, had to postpone her Senate confirmation hearing after
   going into labor with her first child, a spokesperson said. Dr
   Means, nominated to be the "nation's top doctor", was scheduled to
   appear before the Senate committee virtually because of her
   advanced pregnancy. Unlike past surgeon generals, the 38-year-old
   Stanford-trained doctor and wellness entrepreneur DOES NOT HAVE AN
   ACTIVE MEDICAL LICENSE. She is known for her SKEPTICISM OF
   CONVENTIONAL MEDICINE AND PROMOTION OF WELLNESS PRODUCTS
   instead. Read more:  BBC [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]

Head of RFK Jr.’s vaccine panel: SCHOOL MANDATES ‘NOT NECESSARY’ 

   Martin Kulldorff, chair of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
   Practices (ACIP) at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
   (CDC), said in an interview Thursday he believes vaccine mandates
   for schools are “not necessary.” In an interview with Politico, the
   ACIP’s influence on school vaccine policy was noted and Kulldorff
   was asked how he wanted the committee to approach the issue. Last
   month, Florida moved to ban all school vaccine mandates in the
   state. The decision drew pushback from some Republicans in
   Congress, with Sen. Thom Tillis (N.C.) calling it a “horrible
   idea.” Read more:  The Hill [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]

Threat to US vaccines as CDC staff supporting key advisory panel laid off 

   The staff supporting the Advisory Committee on Immunization
   Practices (ACIP) WERE LET GO EARLIER THIS MONTH in a sweeping round
   of layoffs that GUTTED ENTIRE DEPARTMENTS of the US Centers for
   Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Most of the committee’s
   working groups, which pore over data and help set the agendas,
   haven’t met for months, and there was little communication from the
   staff even before they received reduction in force (RIF) notices
   during the US government shutdown. Read more:  The Guardian
   [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]

Kennedy directs CDC to study alleged harms of offshore wind farms, Bloomberg News
   reports 

   U.S. Health Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. ordered the Centers for
   Disease Control and Prevention staff to probe the potential harms
   of offshore wind farms, Bloomberg News reported on Tuesday, citing
   people familiar with the matter. The move is part of a broader push
   by the Trump administration to SCRUTINIZE OFFSHORE WIND
   DEVELOPMENT, which Trump himself has repeatedly criticized. The
   report added that the office of the U.S. surgeon general has also
   been involved in the initiative, which the HHS, prior to the
   ongoing government shutdown, aimed to have completed within a
   couple of months. Read more:  Reuters [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]

Navy REPLACES ADMIRAL LEADING NAVAL RESEARCH WITH FORMER DOGE STAFFER 

   The U.S. Navy has replaced the admiral in charge of the Office of
   Naval Research with a civilian who has reportedly worked as a
   Department of Government Efficiency staffer, according to the
   service. Rear Adm. Kurt. Rothenhaus, who has served as chief of
   naval research since June 2023, has been reassigned and replaced by
   Rachel Riley, who most recently acted as a senior adviser for the
   U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, a Navy public affairs
   official confirmed in an emailed statement Thursday. Read more: 
   Navy Times [vsadc.us4.list-manage.com]



                      GSFC UNDER ATTACK

10/31/25: Space.com. Josh Dinner.

  NASA is sinking its flagship science center during the government
  shutdown — and may be breaking the law in the process, critics say
  "There is just a general acknowledgement that a lot of what is
  happening is illegal…"

NASA's flagship center for space science is under attack from within,
and some of the biggest losses appear to be happening behind the curtain
of the government shutdown.

Throughout the summer of 2025, Space.com interviewed nearly a dozen
current and former_NASA_ workers and reviewed several internal agency
communications in an investigation into allegations of unlawful
activity by NASA leadership — allegations supported in a_recent
report_ by the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation. The conclusion: NASA has been prematurely and
illegally implementing the President's 2026 budget request before
Congress finalizes funding.

The workforce at NASA's_Goddard Space Flight Center_ (GSFC) in
Greenbelt, Maryland, say this has put groundbreaking missions at risk,
and is degrading roadblocks designed to safeguard human lives. Now,
under the cloak of a closed U.S. government, nearly half the GSFC
campus — the hub of NASA science — is marked for abandonment.

      Goddard has a target on its back

Goddard has worked on some of NASA's most iconic space science
missions, including the James Webb Space Telescope and the Hubble
Space Telescope, which continue to provide groundbreaking astronomical
discoveries, and OSIRIS-REx, NASA's first asteroid sample-return
mission. It's also where NASA is tackling ambitious new missions like
the_Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope_, the_Laser Interferometer Space
Antenna_ (LISA) to detect gravitational waves and measure ripples in
space-time, and the Venus atmospheric probe_DAVINCI_.

GSFC hosts the_largest single concentration of researchers_
in the NASA workforce, encompassing the agency's Science Mission
Directorate (SMD) and Engineering and Technology Directorate
(ETD). Nearly 10,000 scientists and engineers work at Goddard in
total, around 7,000 of whom are employed through NASA
contractors. Center staff said they felt what they perceived as the
new administration's vitriol for science early on.

"The atmosphere, from my perspective, at least, has been incredibly dark
and depressing," Goddard astrophysicist Casey McGrath told_Space.com_
<http://space.com/>, clarifying that he was not speaking on behalf of
NASA or his agency contract employer. "I feel like the people I work
with, myself included, have just been demoralized, exhausted, terrified,
frustrated and angry, for months and months on end with no pause
whatsoever."

The internal cultures of NASA centers across the country have evolved to
align, at least in part, with the political leanings of their respective
locales. With Goddard based in a Democratic state under a Republican
administration, many there feel as though the space center is being
singled out.

Casey Dreier, chief of space policy at the space science and exploration
advocacy nonprofit The Planetary Society, explained the divide_during a
Sept. 18 livestream_ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uwUhLmM4UdQ> about
NASA's ongoing budget saga.

"There's been a really notable divergence and concentration within NASA,
almost purely by a historical accident of its major internal
directorates and responsibilities, where human spaceflight NASA centers
have become very solidly Republican represented, at least at the state
level, and NASA science centers have become very Democratic represented
at the state level," Dreier said.

    "My title is Research Physical Scientist ... even though I'm
    actually a climate scientist. Apparently the c-word just sets some
    people off."  — Claire

It's a perception shared by many Goddard employees. "Claire," who asked
that her real name remain anonymous for fear of retribution, is a
climate scientist at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) — a
branch of the Maryland campus that, until earlier this year, occupied a
building on the Columbia University campus in New York City. While her
primary focus is on climate science, Claire's official title is Research
Physical Scientist. She referred to "climate" as the "c-word,"**and a
term she and her colleagues constantly felt the need to talk around,
rather than say outright.

"It does feel like there is an overlap between the political party in
charge of your NASA center and how your NASA center is faring right
now," Claire said. "Goddard is a science-based center with a lot of
engineers, and a lot of their missions are canceled out (in the
President's budget request). It's taking a huge hit to the civil service
workforce. It does feel like Goddard is now being singled out."

In January 2025, former NASA Administrator Bill Nelson stepped down
from the position ahead of Trump's inauguration, making way for the
appointment of_Kennedy Space Center_ Director_Janet Petro_ as the
agency's acting administrator. Petro was_tasked with steering NASA's
early transition_ period.

At Goddard, Segrid Harris was appointed ETD director in January and
began enforcing rigid expectations that many staff saw as a cultural
break from NASA norms.

After that, "the mood started changing almost immediately," Rose
Ferreira, a former Goddard spaceflight analyst who was_abruptly laid
off_ during_SpaceX_ CEO Elon Musk's early DOGE (Department of
Government Efficiency) sweep through the federal workforce, told
Space.com. "The language that was being used in some of our internal
emails was so aggressive. I've never seen anything like this from
NASA," Ferreira said at the time.

    "I think they know that what they're doing shouldn't be put in
         writing."  — Wendy

"[Harris] was brought in from the Air Force, and she is very strict on
the chain of command, and basically is implementing what center
management is telling her to do," said "Wendy," a Goddard spacecraft
engineer who also spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of
retribution, in an interview.

"When we had DOGE coming on site, we had some supervisors saying that if
DOGE asks you for access to your laptop, you should give it to them.
Basically, just hand over the keys," Wendy said. "That direction was
implied to come from Engineering management, but not put in writing."

"It's really hard for us to get anything in writing from Engineering
management, because I think they know that what they're doing shouldn't
be put in writing," she added.

Another GSFC civil servant who asked to remain anonymous, "Peter," said
that's by design. "Goddard management is very good at obfuscating its
intentions directly, either through refusal to put any directives in
writing or by working through chain of command, such that decisions
don't necessarily reflect back on the individual who ultimately made
them." Peter spoke with Space.com about ongoing building closures taking
place at Goddard's Greenbelt campus, but months before, GISS was
identified as the first in a chain of dominos to be knocked down.


      GISS: The first to fall

By March, NASA was_implementing workforce reductions_ and closing
offices (such as the Office of the Chief Scientist and the Office of
Technology, Policy & Strategy). Internal speculation about NASA's
future painted a bleak picture for Goddard and its
programs. Meanwhile, the vulnerability of NASA's climate science
programs was being_underscored nationally_, as former agency
leadership raised the alarm.

"The first person that was fired at NASA … was the Chief Scientist and
Chief Climate Officer," Nelson_said during an event_ in Washington,
D.C. in April. "I think we need to be concerned about that."

That concern, it seems, was warranted. Later that month, GISS
employees were_ordered to vacate_ their Columbia University building
(which many may recognize as the one with the corner diner in the show
/Seinfeld/). Since then, they've been forced to work remotely — at a
time when the government was doling out_return-to-office mandates_ —
preventing access to labs and crippling the center's mission of
embedding NASA climate scientists within international
academia. Though the closure came as a shock, the reasoning behind it
seemed obvious to those on the ground.

"We have one of the original models for climate simulation," Claire
explained. GISS develops and maintains research on atmospheric
composition and long-term_climate change_, and manages NASA's global
surface temperature record — one of the world's key climate datasets.

"We have the ignoble distinction now of being the second NASA center
ever closed down," Claire said. NASA's Electronics Research Center in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, was the first,_shuttered in 1970 due to
budget cuts_ during the restructuring of the_Apollo program_.

Jim Green, a former_NASA Chief Scientist_ who retired in 2022 after 42
years at the agency, told Space.com that stewardship of that climate
research requires a significant undertaking.

"The huge Earth science workforce at Goddard analyzes an enormous amount
of Earth science data that comes in … That requires quite a cadre of
very knowledgeable people," Green said. "Not only the project scientists
and the scientists analyzing the data coming from those missions, but
also the scientists that are managing multi-mission analysis. That's
particularly true in Earth science."

Green said climate and Earth science have a big footprint at NASA.
"Earth science in particular has a huge, huge infrastructure analyzing
our Earth satellites. So I think they, of course, have been hit
disproportionately because of the approach the administration is
taking," he said.

The move out of the GISS building was chaotic. Equipment for one NASA
mission,_PACE_ (Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud, ocean Ecosystem) — a
satellite_launched in February 2024_ that measures the health of
Earth's oceans — had to be hurriedly moved between agency sites to
avoid program setbacks.

"There was about, I don't know, a million dollars worth of [PACE]
equipment," Claire estimated. "They told us to get out of the building …
So the PI (principal investigator) rented a car, and he put all of the
stuff in the car and drove through the night to put it on another NASA
facility so that it'd be safe."

GISS's position on a university campus allowed for a unique
relationship between the facility and academia. Only_about a third of
the people who work at GISS_ are federal employees or federal
contractors. The other two-thirds work for Columbia and other
universities. "They are those soft-money scientists who are totally
supported by those federal research grants," Claire said.

"They didn't fire us, but they didn't have to fire us," Claire said.
"All they have to do is stop putting money into federal research grants,
and it will have the same impact without any of the stop measures that
you have for the federal civil service. Those do not exist in the
academic community for the federal research grants."

While they still have work to do, their ability to do it is being
siloed. "When it comes to doing cutting-edge science, having a little
bit of face time goes a really long way," Claire explained. "The cross
talk, the back-and-forth that you cannot have during Zoom meetings —
during face-to-face meetings, you can. You actually make a lot of
progress," she said. "That's all gone. And so this piece of our mission,
which was to be integrated into the academic community — we've been cut
off at our knees."

Claire used_Climate Week NYC_, an event celebrated at the end of
September, as an example of opportunities missed as a result of the
new constraints. "There are people coming to New York City from across
the world," she said at the time. "If we still had our facility and
that was happening, we would have dozens of meetings leveraging our
conference centers on site, so that we could be true to our mission …
Now, we're scrambling just to find a space."

Closing GISS may have also violated NASA's agreement with Claire's
employee union. Claire is a member of_GESTA_, the Goddard Engineers,
Scientists and Technicians Association. GESTA operates under the
umbrella of IFPTE, the International Federation of Professional and
Technical Engineers, and advocates for NASA employees' rights, working
conditions and policies.

"As a civil servant, I had a collective bargaining agreement that said
certain things had to happen before there could be a change in working
conditions," Claire said. "My collective bargaining agreement was
totally ignored when they kicked us out of our building with just a
month's notice."

Today, the GISS building presumably still sits empty, with NASA
apparently continuing to foot the bill.

"The super has told us the building is not rented out," Claire said. "He
thinks it's still being paid for. They're not showing it off to anyone
else."

In retrospect, Claire wondered if GISS was a test case for closures at
Goddard that came months later, and are happening now.

"They are closing down a significant part of the Goddard campus, and so
I think that we [at GISS] were singled out to be the first one to get
poked," she said. "In general, Goddard is not a favorite amongst the
NASA centers."


      NASA's budget eviscerated

Days after GISS employees were given notice to vacate their building,
the White House released the FY26 Presidential Budget Request (PBR). It
proposed a historic 24% cut to overall NASA funding and slashed the
money for space agency science programs by 47%.

Experts called the cuts catastrophic, saying they waste billions in
federal investments and gut groundbreaking missions.

"Three words that we've been using to describe this: unprecedented,
unstrategic and wasteful — wasteful of the taxpayers' investment,"
Jack Kiraly, director of government relations at the Planetary
Society, said during the_Sept. 18 livestream_. The Planetary Society
has lobbied to restore NASA's budget in Congress's appropriations bill
since the budget request's publication, which_cancels 41 planned or
already active science missions_, including functioning spacecraft
operating in_Earth_ orbit and beyond.

Dreier called it an "extinction-level event."

"This isn't just poor policy — it's fundamentally wasteful and
inefficient, exactly what this Administration is saying it does not
want," Dreier told Space.com in June. "When you abruptly terminate
projects that are already in development, or well-functioning projects
operating for pennies on the proverbial dollar, you're essentially
throwing away all the previous investment while gaining nothing in return."

"The operating missions cancellations alone represent over $12 billion
of invested taxpayer value. And once they're gone, they're gone. It
would take years and many millions more to replace them," he added.

Another casualty of the FY26 budget request was NASA's Office of STEM
Engagement (OSTEM), which was completely eliminated from the space
agency's portfolio. OSTEM was responsible for NASA's educational
outreach and student involvement in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics programs.

"That not only has an effect on what we do at NASA in terms of
workforce development, but also kids across the entire country," said
Julie, an agency employee who did not wish to give her last name, told
Space.com during a worker-organized_demonstration to protest agency
science cuts_ in July. She was not authorized to speak on behalf of
NASA.

Julie listed programs like grad school scholarships and teacher training
initiatives that will be lost in OSTEM's absence. "If that's something
that goes away completely, it's going to impact the entire next
generation of students," she said.

    "We're not talking about delays in scientific exploration. We're
    talking about the end of it."  — Bill Nye, Planetary Society CEO

Since the FY26 budget request's release, pushback has been sharp.
Employees at Goddard under the banner_NASA Needs Help_
<https://sites.google.com/view/nasaneedshelp/home> organized three
public protests over the summer, and have joined organizations like the
Planetary Society and lawmakers to call on Congress to restore NASA's
funding.

At an Oct. 5_day of action on Capitol Hill_ hosted by the Planetary
Society, CEO Bill Nye outlined the stakes. "Fully functioning
spacecraft summarily turned off, development work on virtually every
future science mission summarily halted. We're not talking about
delays in scientific exploration. We're talking about the end of it,"
he said.

To his relief and others,_Congress is pushing back_
<https://www.space.com/space-exploration/senators-push-back-on-trumps-proposal-to-cut-nasa-science-funding-by-47-percent>__on
the proposed cuts.

The Senate Appropriations Committee advanced a measure to fund NASA at
a level comparable to fiscal year 2025, and there is_bipartisan
support_ for maintaining the space agency's science programs. But many
who_protested over the summer_ worry that irreparable damage has
already occurred, and is being accelerated by the government shutdown.

Part of that fear is due to the perception that whatever Congress signs
into law won't matter. Employees assume the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) will illegally impound funds anyway. Some think it's
already happening. "People expect that to continue," said Wendy, the
Goddard engineer. "So they don't trust that Congress's budget will
actually be implemented even after it's passed."

Lawmakers, too, have voiced skepticism about OMB's actions. In
an_op-ed published Aug. 5_, Republican Representative Brian Babin, of
Texas's 36th district, wrote, "Although Congress is working to ensure
NASA has what it needs, the Office of Management and Budget’s proposed
budget doesn't align with Mr. Trump's directives. To be blunt: OMB
needs to start rowing in the same direction. We don't have time for
budget games."

Kiraly, with the Planetary Society, thinks there's a deeper motivation
behind OMB fighting the tide: OMB Director Russell Vought.

"This is not the President's budget. This is not Congress's
budget. This isn't even secretary Sean Duffy's, who's serving as the
acting Administrator of NASA (_since replacing Petro in July_).  This
is Russ Vought's budget," Kiraly said during the Planetary Society
livestream.

Vought, Kiraly said, has it out for NASA. "He is somebody that
historically has not seen a lot of value in space science … who does
not believe that the government should be investing in space
exploration or space science," he said. "And we know that because just
a couple years ago, he very much_wrote this exact thing_. He wants to
propose a 50% reduction to NASA Science."

Dreier agreed. "The problem with the OMB," he said, "is not just that
they can control the flow of money. They control the rate of spending in
addition to preparing these budget requests. So even if you provide them
the money, they can throw in a decent number of internal bureaucratic
hurdles or slow-walk the pace at which this goes out."


      Early enforcement

The debate over the budget and implementation legalities is still taking
place months later. Very quickly after the FY26 budget request's
release, however, NASA leadership started sending messages to staff
about reshaping the agency in that image. They announced organization
restructurings, impending reductions in force (RIFs) and encouraged
space agency employees to take advantage of Deferred Resignation
Programs (DRPs).

In a June 9 email obtained by Space.com, Petro instructed staff to start
implementing changes to reflect "the Administration's priorities."

"While it is moving through the legislative process, the proposed
funding requires action now," the email states. In bold, Petro listed
three different programs available to employees who wanted to do their
part in thinning NASA's workforce: the agency's DRP, Voluntary Early
Retirement (VERA) and a Voluntary Separation Incentive Program (VSIP).

"We're already seeing the agency is moving to put in motion things that
are laid out in the President's budget request, even though Congress
hasn't weighed in yet, because they think it's clear that that is the
direction we're ultimately going to be heading in," McGrath said in July.

That observation was shared by others at Goddard. "The reason a lot of
management says that we have to plan for the President's budget request,
as opposed to Congress's budget, is because they believe that the
President will impound the funds even if Congress passes a budget,"
Wendy said.

U.S. Senator Maria Cantwell (D-Wash.), Ranking Member of the Senate
Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, said_what's
happening at NASA is illegal_. A Democratic staff report released by
Cantwell and the Committee on Sept. 29, titled "_The Destruction of
NASA's Mission_," says NASA's preemptive compliance with the PBR is an
"unconstitutional plot to gut the agency" and circumvents Congress's
authority.

"The President's proposed budget...carries no force of law, cannot
override existing spending laws, and has no legal impact on funding
appropriated by Congress," the report says.

"Losing hundreds of NASA scientists and experts with irreplaceable
experience — especially at Goddard — as well as permanently shuttering
labs, one-of-a-kind equipment and entire buildings, causes irreversible
disruptions to core scientific research that will last far into the
future and undermine the United States’ global leadership position,"
Cantwell told Space.com in a statement.

"We will not win the space race in the long run without fully funding
NASA's science mission," she added.

Duffy named_Amit Kshatriya_ as NASA associate administrator
Sept. 3. After the report's release, Kshatriya unequivocally denied
its claims.

"This report is false," Kshatriya said in a statement to Space.com.
"NASA has communicated openly and transparently with Congress that we
continue to execute our available appropriated funding in accordance
with established fiscal policies which respect congressional authorities."

"NASA will never compromise on safety. The President’s budget request
stands with Congress at this point, and NASA will enact the budget
appropriated to us," Kshatriya added.

NASA Press Secretary Bethany Stevens said that the publication of the
Senate report was strategic, and politically motivated.

"The intentionally timed release of this inflammatory, false report is
nothing more than a distraction tactic from Senate Democrats. As
Democrats push to shut our government down, they’re attempting to divert
attention," she told Space.com in a statement.

The Senate's report supports Space.com's findings, stating, "as early as
June 2025, NASA began 'implementing immediately' certain 'institutional
changes' to align with the President's proposed budget," and asserts
that NASA Chief of Staff Brian Hughes is conspiring with OMB to
"actively implement the President's FY26 budget request."

In an internal NASA email obtained for the report, space agency
leadership was told, "PBR is the direction. Discretionary funds can be
impounded per the Impoundment Act of 1974. If there is a CR (continuing
resolution), impoundment is likely going to get on the table as a
mechanism to get to the PBR."

One of the report's key findings concluded that "OMB Director Russell
Vought's budgetary end game is to use impoundment to illegally implement
the President's proposed budget at NASA, while ignoring congressional
funding levels."

Over the past several months at Goddard, this has been an open secret.
"There is just a general acknowledgement that a lot of what is happening
is illegal," Wendy said, "but people have been told to do it, and so
they feel like they have to do it. That's especially true for
management, because they're getting directives from people above them,
and if they don't comply, they will lose their jobs."


      Reduction in force

Through June and July, leadership continued to push DRPs and signaled
looming RIFs. Morale at Goddard sank as losses mounted, and the future
of different missions hung in limbo.

"We are seeing more and more people taking [the DRP] now while the
window is still open. I think that's kind of because we don't know what
will happen after that window closes, and it might be a worse scenario
than the current one," McGrath said earlier this summer.

Employees in programs that lost their funding in the budget request
are preparing to shut off functioning spacecraft. Some of those active
missions marked for termination include the_Chandra X-ray
Observatory_, which studies high-energy X-ray sources like black
holes, the_MAVEN_ (Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN) orbiter
studying the Martian atmosphere, the_Juno probe_ orbiting Jupiter,
which has_at least another three years of life_ in it, and_New
Horizons_, which became the first spacecraft to fly by Pluto in 2015
and is now exploring the Kuiper Belt beyond.

"Mission leads are being told to plan for their missions to be shut down
if they were zeroed out in the President's budget request, and this
includes missions that are already in space and sending back data and
have very minimal upkeep. They just want to turn them off," Wendy said.
Meanwhile, NASA leadership tightened their embrace of the budget request.

"The President's FY 2026 Budget Request for NASA is NASA's budget
request," Petro wrote in a June 27 email to employees obtained by
Space.com. She acknowledges an ultimate budget has yet to be finalized
by Congress, but that NASA needs "to begin preparing to align our
workforce and resources now to meet the mission priorities [the budget
request] outlines."

The directive was again echoed down the chain of command in a July 9
email to Goddard engineers obtained by Space.com, which says ETD
reorganization plans in development prior to Trump's second term would
be shifted to fit "the vision put forward within the President's Budget
Request for NASA."

McGrath's work in astrophysics supports one of the missions zeroed out
in the FY26 budget request. After its release, his contract employer
wrote to inform him they were unable to guarantee his job past the end
of the fiscal year, which ended Sept. 30.

"I received an email from my direct employer just acknowledging that
elephant in the room," McGrath said earlier this year. "My NASA sponsor
told them I am in a high-risk position right now, and they can't
guarantee anything beyond September 30."

Before that date passed, McGrath's contractor was able to extend his
position through the end of 2025. Now, the government shutdown has put
him and thousands of other contract employees in the awkward position of
having to sign on remotely for work, but without many of their coworkers
and resources needed to do their jobs.

"I can't really communicate with my civil servant colleagues and
bosses since they are all furloughed," McGrath said in October. "My
weekly meetings are canceled or underattended." It has continued this
way for McGrath and many other contract employees since the_shutdown
began on Oct. 1_.

As some contract employers attempted to be as transparent as possible,
NASA's communication efforts with its own workforce shrank over the
course of the year.

A July 17 email obtained by Space.com, sent from one lab chief in a
"First Line Supervisor" position, explained that division town halls
would be canceled indefinitely and to expect department-wide group chat
channels to be disabled. The lab chief said that these changes were made
in an effort to funnel information to employees through First Line
Supervisors, but was unable to say definitively since official reasoning
had not been communicated to that level of management, according to the
email.

"In normal times, all agency GSFC [department] town halls were
officially recorded, but that was discontinued some months ago, and
later most such meetings were stopped entirely," Marshall Finch, a
contract systems administrator at Goddard, told Space.com. He was not
authorized to speak on behalf of NASA or his direct employer.

At the same time, word about the uneasiness within the United States'
scientific community had spread worldwide, and many Goddard scientists
and engineers began receiving recruitment emails from European research
institutions.

Before GSFC town halls ended in the spring, Lystrup mentioned the notion
of scientists being recruited for positions overseas to employees on at
least one occasion. "With grants drying up, there is going to be less
soft money for people to survive on as well," she said in a June 16 town
hall, adding, suggestively, according to Wendy, "I know that there are a
number of countries that are actively recruiting US scientists and
putting money behind recruiting US scientists to go abroad."

Speculation circulated that the reason town halls stopped had to do
with something Lystrup said that NASA higher-ups didn't like. Lystrup
ended up_resigning as GSFC director_ on July 22.

One group was told they were not allowed to talk to HR or any higher
levels of management without first contacting their supervisor. Another
email obtained by Space.com reads, in part, "We must do this because: 1)
management is directing us to communicate this way."

Finch said the changes in communication have been "chilling."

"I have spoken to people afraid to put comments and directives in
writing. I know people afraid to dissent, or afraid to do so in
writing," Finch said. "Some people feel more vulnerable than others, so
we lose their voices as they silence themselves. The result is lost
safety and lost productivity."

As the window to volunteer for a deferred resignation neared its end,
NASA employees were forced to make hard decisions about their future.
"Because our management is telling us that we have to align to the
President's budget request, people are using it to predict whether or
not they will have a job in the next year, and deciding to leave based
on that," Wendy said.

The deadline for NASA employees to opt into the agency's DRP was July
25. By that time, more than 4,000 people at the space agency
had_signed up to leave_, reducing NASA's employee pool by over 20%. At
Goddard,_GESTA reported_ that 447 people chose the DRP route, equating
to roughly one in six GSFC civil servants — about 17% of the center’s
workforce, totaling more than 11% of NASA's voluntary departures
across its 10 major facilities nationwide — the largest of any agency
center.

No one Wendy spoke with who took the DRP actually wanted to leave NASA.
"Prior to this year, they really enjoyed their jobs," she said.


      Loss of science and safety

Unpredictable losses from voluntary departures left many Goddard
programs with holes in their expertise, growing safety concerns and, in
some cases, fractured mission teams that may lack the resources to
continue regardless of what final budget is passed.

"Because of our own management reassigning people to other projects, we
won't have enough people on the projects to keep them going, regardless
of the funding," Wendy said.

Former NASA astronaut Terry Virts joined the space agency in 2000. He
has flown to space twice, served as commander of the_International
Space Station_ and spent a cumulative 213 days in orbit. He retired in
2016 but still maintains a residence in Houston, near NASA's_Johnson
Space Center_ , where he keeps in close contact with his past NASA
community. Virts is currently_running as a Democrat for a U.S. Senate
seat_ in Texas.

"Once the hardware is canceled, once the scientists are gone, you
can't just start [those missions] up again," Virts told Space.com in
an interview. "_Solar system_ probes require engineers to understand
very technical things to work for years on a program. Once you let
someone go, you're not just going to get them back."

"Anytime you're doing something as complicated as launching rockets
and operating spacecraft in_space_ , you don't want turmoil and angst
and people quitting on the ground," Virts said. "The things that are
happening are safety issues for NASA, but they're also safety issues
for the other 330 million Americans."

Virts said that implementing these kinds of cuts to science at NASA
and other federal agencies has "absolutely" already cost human
lives. He pointed to the July 4_Hill Country floods_ in Texas, when
more than 130 people died from the catastrophically rapid rise of the
Guadalupe River, which overtook entire communities.

"The one person who was supposed to warn everybody was gone, thanks to
this administration's disastrous cuts," Virts asserted. Some reports
have speculated that the National Weather Service office in
Austin_lacked a warning coordination meteorologist_ due to an early
retirement tied to federal cuts, and that the person in that position
could have potentially activated an earlier alert system for affected
residents.

On June 24, just before the Hill Country floods became the latest
example of the effects of climate change and natural disasters,
scientists at the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) at the
University of Colorado received word they would_no longer have access
to data_ provided by satellites that form the US Air Force Defense
Meteorological Satellite Program. The NSIDC has long used this
critical information to measure sea ice in real time to inform
the_sea-ice index_, which monitors the amount of ice coverage around
Earth's poles.

The Department of Defense uses those measurements for planning things
like ship deployment, but it has long been integrated into NASA's own
Earth science programs, with_algorithms developed at Goddard_ forming
the backbone of the sea-ice concentration datasets. GSFC scientists
routinely processed the data to monitor polar climate trends. When
access to those feeds was suspended, it didn't just cut off NSIDC, it
also_cut off Goddard's ability_ to update the global datasets it
maintains for NASA's climate missions, effectively blinding parts of
the agency’s environmental monitoring network.

By then, workers at NASA saw the writing on the wall and began to
organize. "A lot of people are starting to realize that the risk to the
whole agency is getting greater and greater," McGrath said in June.
"Time is running out. If we don't say something now, then there's not
going to be much opportunity left going forward."

In addition to the NASA Needs Help_demonstrations over the summer_
nearly 300 current and former NASA employees signed the "_Voyager
Declaration_ which they_published_ on July 21. Its signatories
included astronauts, scientists and engineers protesting the
preemptive funding cuts and employee losses, which, they said,
"threaten to waste public resources, compromise human safety, weaken
national security, and undermine the core NASA mission."

The letter invoked "Technical Authority," an_established process_ put
in place following investigations into the_Columbia_ and_Challenger
space shuttle_ accidents, which establishes employee protections if
they speak out against something they view as unsafe.

    "I can see another Challenger, another Columbia happening down the
    road as a result of this..."  — Julie

Goddard's arm of NASA's Office of Safety and Mission Assurance was hit
particularly hard by position losses, according to employees. The
department is responsible for ensuring safety protocols are followed
through every stage of spacecraft development and testing, and when
scientists and engineers interface with potential hazards like
high-pressure procedures, vacuum chambers, radioactive materials and
heavyweight hardware.

Julie, who attended a July 20 NASA Needs Help_"Moon Day"_
<https://www.space.com/space-exploration/nasa-workers-plan-moon-day-protest-on-july-20-to-oppose-mass-layoffs-budget-cuts-this-year-has-been-an-utter-nightmare-that-has-not-stopped>
demonstration, worried about the effects on NASA's Office of the Chief
Knowledge Officer. "That was set up after Columbia and Challenger to
make sure that we were passing any lessons learned on to the entire
community," she said. "I can see another Challenger, another Columbia
happening down the road as a result of this, and it will ultimately be
blamed back on us."

"We build very specific things," George, a NASA employee who did not
wish to provide his last name, told Space.com at the protest. He feared
the deterioration of critical expertise and the consequences that could
come with it. "If we lose that, we lose that, it's gone. Where are we
going to learn how to do that again? Are we going to have to have
another Challenger moment to learn how to do that again? Maybe."

Employees fear that long-standing safety guardrails are being eroded.
"It feels like a lot of the leadership at NASA is undoing a lot of good
progress that we've made over the past years and decades," McGrath said.
"We're getting real close, I think, to that moment where it might be too
late to undo some of the changes that could happen."

Duffy briefly touched on these concerns during a Sept. 4
all-agency_town hall livestream_ . He acknowledged employee feedback
about insufficient personnel, but downplayed fears over science losses
and safety. "We have Congressionally mandated science, which we're
going to do," he said, "but we also have a lot of science that is
going to drive human exploration, that's going to drive our mission to
the moon. We are going to lean into that science as well."

"Do we have the human resources available? … As of right now, I think we
do," he said, adding that he was open to reevaluating if an assessment
was needed.

"We are safety driven, and we should be safety driven," Duffy said. "But
sometimes we can't let safety be the enemy of making progress. We have
to be able to take some leaps. We have to be able to jump forward in our
innovation and drive this mission. And there's always a balance to that."

For all the cuts in the FY26 budget request, the Trump administration
is doing all it can to bolster human spaceflight programs
like_Artemis_, NASA's effort to return astronauts to_the moon_. But
without a robust scientific portfolio, some at NASA wonder how
astronauts will occupy their time during such missions.

"It turns us away from those quests that give our astronauts something
to do when they're doing the exploration, and keeps them safe while
they're doing it. Science enables exploration," Barbara Cohen, a NASA
planetary scientist, said to attendees of a_Sept. 15 protest_ outside
the agency's Washington, D.C. headquarters. "We need science to drive
the innovation."

NASA seems to be driving in the opposite direction.


      Campus closures begin

Over the last few months, notices have trickled down through
supervisors to inform employees at Goddard of several facility
closures. A July 1 email to managers, obtained by Space.com, announced
the impending closures of the staff fitness facility on the main GSFC
campus — marked for Nov. 30 — and the health facilities at both the
Greenbelt campus and at NASA's_Wallops Flight Facility_ in Virginia,
which operates under Goddard's umbrella.

Goddard's health services are in place to address injuries specific to
the types of hazards NASA scientists and engineers may face, like
exposure to radiation or hypergolic fuels. They also provide physicals
and medical assessments required by people's jobs at the center.
"Anticipated budget reductions in Fiscal Year 2026," was the reason
given for the closures in the email. Both health units were scheduled to
close Oct. 31.

On Aug. 4, in another internal email obtained by Space.com, managers
were notified of more closures — a list that includes buildings,
services and employee socialization hubs across Goddard and Wallops.
Effective Oct. 1, both centers were set to close their employee
cafeteria and motor pool services, as well as vending services and the
recreation center at the Greenbelt campus.

Like the face-to-face collaboration benefits lost at GISS, employees
fear shutting down Goddard's cafeteria will be stifling. "Being able to
meet with colleagues and build relationships over lunch has a big
impact," Wendy said. "That will be a hit to our ability to do our jobs."

NASA officials say maintaining the cafeteria has been a strain on the
center's budget. To compensate, Goddard administration arranged for food
trucks on campus as an alternative option for employees.

Most alarming on the email's list were both facilities' visitor centers.
Closing the visitor centers at Goddard and Wallops would cut off the
only public-facing arms of NASA in their areas and eliminate the
communities' primary way of interacting with the space agency.


      Union fights back

Amid the turmoil over facilities closures, the union representing
Goddard workers took action. A GESTA_press release_ on Aug. 15 opposed
the decisions, and speculated that the closures might be targeted.

"There is growing concern that the closure may be more than a budgetary
decision … GESTA has yet to receive any indications of other NASA
Centers closing their Visitor Centers," the release said, adding that
the decisions were being "perceived by some employees as purposefully
punitive, seemingly designed to inflict maximum institutional pain on
remaining employees who chose not to voluntarily separate or resign
during recent agency downsizing and restructuring."

"It does feel to me, and to a lot of people that I've talked to, that
this is all part of making life miserable so that people leave," Wendy
said at the time.

Goddard leadership declined Space.com's request for an interview. In an
email sent Sept. 16 in response to that request, Goddard News Chief Rob
Garner said the GSFC officials were "reviewing functions and
capabilities as the center works to close out Fiscal Year 2025 and look
ahead." He added that Goddard officials were "exploring a number of
actions, including some that may involve closure of facilities," and
that "no decisions have been made."

Beyond the view of the public, more closures were taking place.
Employees received instructions to relocate from several buildings on
Goddard's campus over the summer. They were moved from workspaces, like
labs with specialized spacecraft testing equipment and infrastructure,
to "windowless cubicle farms," Wendy said. One group was moved into a
new building that lacked adequate lab space, another into a lab that
lacked a functional climate control system. GESTA quickly stepped into
negotiations about the change in working conditions.

The union filed bargaining proposals over the office and lab
relocations, citing Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA)
precedent, and several moves were paused._In an email_ to union
members, GESTA identified ETD Deputy Director for Planning and
Business Management Matt Ritsko as the one who orchestrated the
reassignments, "in concert with [top level] Management" to create a
cost-savings option for center leadership. This was "driven," the
email said, by "anticipated reductions in the upcoming fiscal year."

Ritsko serves just under Harris_at the top of the Engineering
department_, which reports directly to Goddard's Office of the
Director and, since Lystrup's resignation, acting Goddard Director
Cynthia Simmons.


      Unions eliminated

As negotiations between GESTA and Goddard management continued, the
union had the proverbial rug pulled out from under it. In late August,
an_executive order by Trump_ reclassified NASA as one of the federal
agencies excluded from the requirement to offer employees the right to
collective bargaining under_Chapter 71 of Title 5_ of the FLRA
Management Relations Statute, banning unions at the space agency on
the grounds of “national security.”

    "...the immediate harm suffered could be insurmountable for many
    of the employees."  — Mark Gaston Pearce

A man stands outside holding a microphone in front of a NASA sign.

IFPTE President Matthew Biggs addresses protesters during a Sept. 15
demonstration outside NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C. (Image
credit: NASA Needs Help)

"That's supposed to make us work more efficiently? That's just going to
make all of us less safe," Monica Gorman, a GESTA area VP, said to
protesters outside NASA's D.C. headquarters**on Sept. 15. "It's going to
put NASA's missions at risk, and it's going to put NASA's people at risk."

At that same demonstration, representatives from GESTA's parent body
came to show their support._IFPTE_ President Matthew Biggs told those
gathered that the union was already in the process of_challenging the
order_ in court. "It's a lot easier to do RIFs if there's no labor
unions there to challenge them," he said. "So we are going to
challenge it in the courts, and we're challenging it on Capitol Hill,
and we're going nowhere."

Even if the unions have a case, the system is built against them, said
Mark Gaston Pearce, who served as chairman of the National Labor
Relations Board in the Obama administration from 2011 to 2017, and is
the former executive director of, and currently a senior advisor at,
Georgetown University's Workers' Rights Institute.

"There will probably be causes of actions that can be pursued, but the
practical nature of these circumstances is such that these employees
will need to continue to keep working," Pearce said. "Funding these
lawsuits are not a simple matter, and even if that is achievable, the
time that would be taken for all of this to take place will be so, so
long in the future that the immediate harm suffered could be
insurmountable for many of the employees."


      Negotiations end, cuts accelerate

    "The Engineering and Technology Directorate in particular, seemed
    like it was ignoring that guidance..."  — Peter

Trump's executive order freed Goddard leadership of their obligation to
debate with GESTA about facility closures and anything else. The union
was given 48 hours' notice to clear their resources from the conference
room previously dedicated for their use, and employees were barred from
congregating there during off hours.

Negotiations with GESTA stopped, and center leadership kicked their
reorganization efforts into overdrive.

Despite_media reports_ indicating that Acting Administrator Duffy
directed NASA to begin working toward the budget outlined in the House
Appropriations Committee’s bill for the coming fiscal year, which
restored much of the science programs initially cut in the PBR, that
direction was not one communicated through Goddard's management levels
to employees.

"There was certainly no widespread communication broadly disseminated to
the workforce informing them that we would now be following the House
budget request instead of the President's budget request at Goddard,"
said Peter, the GSFC civil servant. "That is unlike activities that I
have seen through other centers."

NASA officials maintain they provided appropriate guidance to agency
centers and mission directorates, instructing each to spend according
to anticipated budget appropriations in alignment with presidential
priorities, and that the agency remains in full compliance
with_Section 505 Appropriations reporting requirements_. Duffy and
other agency leadership have repeatedly assured critics they intend to
follow the law, and adhere to whatever Congress ultimately passes. He
even said as much directly to lawmakers at the House Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure’s hearing on July 17, promising to
"follow the will of Congress."

"The Engineering and Technology Directorate, in particular, seemed like
it was ignoring that guidance from headquarters and instead continuing
to plan to the Presidential budget request," Peter said. This would
stand in direct contradiction to guidance passed down from NASA's top
leadership, Space.com has learned.

The "cost savings" closures initiated by Ritsko to align with Trump's
budget proposal expanded to include Goddard's_20-year Master Plan_
a vision for the center that began in 2017 and outlines upgrades,
renovations and other changes to GSFC's 1,270-acre (514-hectare)
campus, including the demolition of older facilities and the
construction of new buildings through 2037. It includes reducing the
campus's footprint by nearly 50%.

On Sept. 22, as worries over a looming government shutdown mounted in
the face of deadlocked negotiations in Washington, Goddard Associate
Center Director Raymond Rubilotta announced a rapid acceleration of the
Master Plan from 20 years to six months.

"Beginning Wednesday, Sept. 24, we will initiate a series of moves at
both campuses that will reduce our footprint into fewer buildings,"
Rubilotta said in an email to Goddard employees, obtained by Space.com.
"All planned moves will take place over the next several months and will
be completed by March of 2026."

A document with redactions and highlights.
<https://cdn.mos.cms.futurecdn.net/6JZPKNRMkyeh4FosPn2dHP.jpg>
An email on Sept. 22 announces the acceleration of Goddard's 20-year
Master Plan. (Image credit: obtained by Space.com)

Over the week that followed, employees described hectic disorganization.
"People are being told to relocate offices on short notice, often
chaotically with little planning. They are being told to highly
prioritize the moves," Wendy said.

There were instances of employees being assigned workspaces already
occupied by others and unable to return to their original offices,
buildings being emptied of personnel with no current plan to recover or
relocate potentially millions of dollars of equipment left behind,
employees told Space.com. "It's crazy," said Finch, the systems admin.

The_long-term plans_ for Goddard's main campus included the
construction of nine new facilities, the renovation of 10 facilities
and "divestment or partial divestment of 12 facilities, and the
demolition of 61 facilities." In this case, "facilities"_encompasses
everything_ from land, utilities, buildings and really any structure
on NASA's property.

While there is no current work underway to begin construction on any of
the new facilities shown in the plans, almost half of the largest
buildings marked for future divestment or demolition have been listed
for abandonment by the March deadline — nearly everything west of
Goddard Road (the red line), on this map provided to Space.com.

The slides below highlight which of the buildings planned for demolition
by 2037 have been accelerated to the March 2026 timeline, and where
planned constructions overlap.

Image 1 of 3

a map with highlighted buildings and a red line down the left-center.
Buildings marked for divestment or demolition in Goddard's 20-year
Master plan. According to employees, nearly everything west (right) of
Goddard Road (the red line) is on an expedited track to be closed by
March 2026.(Image credit: obtained by Space.com)


        Expedited closures

A map of planned closures taking place at Goddard through March 2026.

a map with highlighted buildings and a red line down the left-center.
This map from Goddard's 20-year Master plan shows planned demolitions to
take place by 2037, many of which have been accelerated to just a few
months.(Image credit: NASA)

        Planned demolitions

A map from Goddard's 20-year Master plan showing planned demolitions to
take place by 2037.

a map with highlighted buildings and a red line down the left-center.
This map from Goddard's 20-year Master plan shows planned constructions
to take place by 2037, none of which have been completed or broken
ground on during the accelerated closure of many buildings on the GSFC
campus.(Image credit: NASA)

        Planned construction

A map from Goddard's 20-year Master plan showing planned constructions
to take place by 2037.


For NASA, the staffing decrease as result of the DRP was one of the
motivations behind ramping up building consolidations, which the agency
assured are being methodically carried out in order to preserve the
science and resources needed across projects. The buildings being
vacated were apparently already 40% unoccupied, and a burdensome cost on
center resources.

According to Wendy, if GSFC leadership is using the smaller workforce to
justify the downsizing, the numbers don't add up. "They basically want
to move everybody out of half of the buildings on campus. Half of the
physical footprint of Goddard. But we only lost about a third of our
employees to DRP and attrition," she said.

More than just a logistical challenge of physical space, the moves
themselves seem to ignore the impact of what's being left behind.
"They're being implemented in inept ways that do not properly account
for how unique the technical work that has been done at Goddard truly
is," Peter said. "It seems that there is a lack of understanding in
Goddard management in general as to what technical capabilities we have,
and what's actually important to retain them."

a map transitions to show building demolition plans.

Maps**show Goddard's 20-year Master Plan, with nearly half of the
Greenbelt campus now marked for abandonment — a visual "hollowing out"
of NASA’s flagship science hub. (Image credit: obtained by Space.com)


      Government shutdown

Days after Rubilotta’s Master Plan notice,_OMB issued a memo_, first
reported by_Politico_ directing agencies to consider reduction in
force notices during a shutdown for programs not aligned with the
"President's priorities."

On Sept. 29, NASA_updated the agency's shutdown guidance_ to add a
similar "presidential priorities" phrase, heightening employee fears
that the administration would use the government shutdown as an excuse
for further layoffs and project cuts.

Goddard's leadership did not provide employees any center-specific
shutdown instructions, according to employees. "They didn’t hold a
single town hall — other [NASA] centers did — and didn't send any
guidance on what to do during a shutdown," Wendy said. What they did
send was "a big new re-organization email," which came at 5 p.m. on the
evening before the shutdown began.

    "We are shutting down center capabilities with no plan to replace
    them..."     — Peter

Some groups received instructions to pack their work and equipment — in
some cases, massive testing hardware — and were told to stand by for a
notice with a 48-hour window to relocate.

"Active research and mission development has been greatly disrupted as
some labs have been told to leave their buildings immediately," McGrath
said. "A very hard task to do when you have extremely sensitive
equipment that isn't just meant to be moved on a whim. So we are
shutting down center capabilities with no plan to replace them in other
lab facilities."

While the government was closing its doors for business, Goddard's
management laid the groundwork to make sure theirs were deadbolted.
"Raymond Rubilotta (Associate Center Director) and Segrid Harris
(Director for the Engineering and Technology Directorate) are continuing
to push the disassembly of Goddard Center at a rapid pace, even while
the government is shut down," McGrath said.

On Oct. 1, the first day of the shutdown, some staff were still being
told to come pack their offices as part of their "orderly shutdown
procedure," according to an email sent that morning, obtained by
Space.com, and that movers would relocate the contents if and when new
workspaces were assigned. "Normally, the orderly shutdown activities are
limited to things like getting your work into a safe state, setting
automatic replies on your emails, and clearing out your fridge," Wendy said.

    "It's being done essentially in secret, on compressed timelines,
    and it seems to be that the justification for doing so is under
    false pretenses."  — Peter

As the shutdown continued into multiple weeks, Goddard leadership began
designating select employees with part-time excepted status, deeming the
consolidation of "technical work and employees" as a priority, and
reinstating their furlough once their offices are packed.

For federal workers during the government shutdown, an “exemption”
differs from an “exception.” Contracted movers paid from pre-obligated
funds, for example, could be considered exempt, but federal civil
servants would not. An exception, by contrast, allows employees to
continue certain unfunded activities because they are necessary to
protect life or property.

Only two exceptions have been approved for facility relocations during
the shutdown so far at Goddard, Space.com has learned, and no office
spaces were submitted as part of those requests. In fact, over 100
office space moves were put on hold specifically because of the
government shutdown. However, employees needing to relocate their
workspaces as a result of their laboratory spaces being moved did fall
into the excepted category.

"It's unclear what activity is really taking place under any officially
approved status from headquarters at this point," Peter said.

"It's being done essentially in secret, on compressed timelines," he
added, "and it seems to be that the justification for doing so is
under false pretenses, and the activities themselves may also be
illegal due to_Anti Deficiency Act_ violations of recalling civil
servants from furlough."

"The expectation will be to report onsite no later than Thursday October
16th to conduct packing of your office materials and any lab
preparations," reads an Oct. 14 email to employees, obtained by
Space.com. Employees were given three business days to do so, according
to the email, and informed that, once packed, their offices' contents
would be moved to "offices and labs as they are ready."

"I think one of the intents of the master plan was to move people out of
buildings that were falling apart, but we have not built new buildings
to move those people into, and we don't have lab spaces available,"
Wendy said.

Employees on some teams were told that if they were unable to complete
evaluations of their lab equipment, whatever wasn't designated give-away
or keep would be thrown out. "All items not marked in labs by COB Monday
10/20 will be excessed," an Oct. 16 email, obtained by Space.com, said.

"There's equipment that is being planned to just be abandoned in place,"
Wendy said.

All that hardware adds up. Peter said losses will include "tens of
millions of dollars and decades' worth of investment in these facilities
that historically have been considered core to Goddard's capabilities."

Take, for instance, Building 19, which houses the
Goddard_Electro-Magnetic Anechoic Chamber_ for testing antennas and
other microwave devices used on spacecraft, communications
laboratories, hardware assembly rooms and the avionics laboratory,
among others.

Of Building 19's infrastructure, at least eight laboratories have been
completely divested without replacement, with some still needed to
support critical functions for ongoing or upcoming missions, according
to Peter.

So far, at least four sites on Goddard's campus have already been
impacted, including Buildings 20, 30 and 32, as well as Building 19,
which, as of Oct. 24, was "emptied of all government and personal
property and is being locked and made inaccessible," Peter said. There
is speculation about which will be next, he added.


      The cost of moving

Many scientists and engineers track their time and workload according to
the projects that work is associated with, including missions based out
of other NASA centers. This allows NASA to track costs across multiple
missions, funding sources and facilities nationwide. Employee hours are
tracked under a different "charge code" during a government shutdown,
however.

For employees packing up and moving their offices during the shutdown,
though, "they're being told to charge their projects," Wendy said.
According to her, this could lead to a situation where a mission based
out of Johnson Space Center, for example, is paying for part of
Goddard's employee relocation efforts, making the actual cost of work
being done during the shutdown harder to track.

"If there's ever a cost-benefit analysis of how much money we're saving,
versus how much money we're spending and losing by throwing stuff out,
that won't be tracked accurately," Wendy said.

Marking those hours under certain mission costs like this will hit some
harder than others.

"Some of these are independent research projects that people have worked
really hard to propose funding for," Wendy said. "It's a very limited
pot of money that they have … and they're being asked to spend that
money on moving their lab."


      An uncertain future

The feeling that Goddard is being targeted has been hard to shake for
those working within its walls. "Seems like Goddard is giving up on its
future, whether that is being forced by headquarters, OMB and the White
House, versus management not doing a good job protecting it. Some people
are speculating that NASA is using Goddard as a sacrifice to preserve
the rest of the agency," Wendy said.

Green, who worked at NASA through several administrations before
becoming Chief Scientist, says the space agency has weathered turbulent
times before. "NASA has gone through, in my 42 years as a civil servant,
huge changes. We've had many buyouts. We've had huge hiring freezes. We
have had RIFs," Green said, and offered advice to the NASA employees
currently riding out the storm:

"Stay the course. Keep doing what you're doing. Don't anticipate you
won't be doing it tomorrow, until you're told you won't be doing it
tomorrow, but then also be flexible … If you're not taking that
knowledge and connecting it to something else that you can go to, that's
a problem."

That course may now be much more difficult to navigate as employees
steer the murky waters of a management hierarchy they feel doesn't
support them. And, whatever Congress ultimately passes may indeed no
longer matter. The damage at Goddard is already being felt in lost
expertise, dismantled facilities and the quiet unraveling of the
center's safety infrastructure.

With projects bracing for termination, mission teams broken apart and
safety protocols weakened, the guardrails that once kept NASA from
repeating its worst tragedies are being stripped away in real time. Labs
are being shuttered faster than they can be reestablished, institutional
knowledge is walking out the door faster than it can be replaced and the
foundation that once made Goddard the center of NASA’s scientific
excellence may never regain the depth of comprehension and capability it
once held.

As Goddard is hollowed from within, center scientists and engineers like
Wendy and Peter can't help but feel deflated.

"Regardless of how priorities may shift at Goddard in terms of what
kinds of work we support, what is an absolute certainty at this point is
that we as a center will be incapable of supporting as many types of
work as we have historically," Peter said.

Wendy sees implications beyond just Goddard and NASA.

"I think it just kind of speaks to the atmosphere of the agency and the
nation," she said, "where people are like, 'Well, laws don't matter for
the people at the top anymore.'"

-------

      All Comments

 1.
            Comment by Ross Warren.
    RW
    Ross Warren

    1 hr ago

    Excerpt from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
    Medicine 2024 report: NASA at a Crossroads.

    "NASA's budget is often incompatible with the scope, complexity, and
    difficulty of its mission work. The long-term impacts of this
    mismatch include erosion of capabilities in workforce, critical
    infrastructure, and advanced technology development. The current
    relative allocations of funding to mission work as compared to that
    allocated to institutional (i.e. underutilized NASA centers), has
    degraded NASA's capabilities to the point where agency
    sustainability is in question."

    NASA simply can't afford to keep all the current centers left over
    from the Apollo days, strewn across the nation, running. Some of
    them need to be closed and missions consolidated to save money.
    Perhaps it will be Goddard that bears the storm of closure in order
    to save NASA. Back when NASA was getting 3% of the federal budget
    such considerations weren't necessary, but NASA has been stuck at
    0.5% (half a penny out of each bloated Federal dollar spent) since
    the Nixon and Carter years. Something has to give. NASA isn't
    supposed to be a jobs program, but rather a program that delivers
    for the American people.


                Reply by descender.

        de
        descender
        34 min ago

        Reply to Ross Warren

        Conservatives defunding a government program until it can't
        function properly and then declaring "it doesn't work and should
        be privitized" has been going on for almost 100 years.

            Comment by bluedresses.
    bl

    bluedresses
    3 hrs ago

    Thank you for your detailed reporting on this. My husband is an
    engineer at Goddard and the past year has been agonizing for our
    family. The uncertainty, the fear, the outright lies and
    contradictions from GSFC leadership… I am stunned every single day
    by the ways in which GSFC continues to undermine and intimidate its
    own employees, and undermine with them the missions and projects
    already authorized by Congress.


            Comment by Simon DelMonte.
    SD
    Simon DelMonte

    3 hrs ago

    About time you started running articles like this.

    Sadly, we have the perfect storm of people who think the only things
    the government should fund are the military and police, people who
    think science is bunk, jingoists who are only interested in "beating
    China to the Moon," and out and out tyrants. We can protest all we
    want, but the conjunction of Trump, Vought, Duffy, and the rest,
    abusing power left and right, makes it unlikely anything we say or
    do will matter.


                 --- ENDD GSFC UNDER ATTACK ---



NOVEMBER 

11/4/25: NYT Trump Again Names Jared Isaacman to Lead NASA After
  Pulling His Nomination / The nomination of the billionaire
  entrepreneur, private astronaut and Elon Musk ally was before the
  floor of the Senate when the president abruptly withdrew it in June.

Five months after President Trump abruptly yanked the nomination of
the person he had chosen to lead NASA
he finally put forth a new nomination on Tuesday — of the same person.

Jared Isaacman, 42, a billionaire entrepreneur who led two private
missions to orbit on SpaceX rockets, is again in line to become the next
NASA administrator.

"Jared's passion for Space, astronaut experience, and dedication to
pushing the boundaries of exploration, unlocking the mysteries of the
universe, and advancing the new Space economy, make him ideally suited
to lead NASA into a bold new Era," the president wrote in a post on
Truth Social.

He did not acknowledge that he had earlier named Mr. Isaacman to the
post, nor that he had angrily withdrawn the nomination.

In his own post on the website X, Mr. Isaacman thanked the president.
"It will be an honor to serve my country under your leadership," he
said.

Should Mr. Isaacman's second nomination be confirmed, he will assume
leadership of a NASA with a thinner budget and a reduced work force that
could be recovering from the effects of a prolonged government shutdown.

When Mr. Trump originally nominated Mr. Isaacman in December, it seemed
in part to be related to the enterpreneur's close association with Elon
Musk, the founder and chief executive of SpaceX. But by late May, Mr.
Musk, then leading the Department of Government Efficiency, had a
falling out with the president over a domestic policy bill that
rancorously spilled over to social media.

On May 31, the day after Mr. Musk left his government role, and just
days before the Senate was scheduled to vote on Mr. Isaacman, Mr. Trump
announced that he would withdraw the nomination. Mr. Trump was upset
that Mr. Isaacman had contributed to the campaigns of some Democrats,
including former Senator Bob Casey of Pennsylvania.

Despite the sacrifices that Mr. Isaacman made to avoid conflicts of
interest as NASA administrator --  stepping down as chief executive of the
payment processing company Shift4, canceling contracts with SpaceX for
future space missions and selling off his aerospace investments -- he has
remained publicly cordial and deferential toward Mr. Trump.

"I am incredibly grateful to President Trump @POTUS, the Senate and
all those who supported me throughout this journey," he wrote on X the
day that Mr. Trump made his U-turn.

In September, Mr. Isaacman, filling in for Mr. Musk, attended a dinner
of Silicon Valley executives that Mr. Trump hosted at the White House.

Mr. Isaacman has also chimed in to support Mr. Trump on issues unrelated
to space, including military attacks on boats of suspected drug
smugglers, which many experts regard as illegal.

"I really support this," Mr. Isaacman wrote on X last month.

NASA has been without a permanent leader for more than 10 months. As is
typical, Bill Nelson, the space agency's administrator under the Biden
administration, stepped down when Mr. Trump was sworn in.

Janet Petro, the director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, filled
in as acting administrator until July. Then President Trump decided that
Sean Duffy, the secretary of transportation, would temporarily lead NASA.

Like many federal agencies, NASA has been unsettled by the Trump
administration's shifts in policy. The president and his advisers are
seeking to pivot the agency's priorities in space, proposing deep cuts
to Earth science and robotic missions to other worlds while placing a
greater emphasis on sending astronauts to the moon and maybe Mars.

In recent weeks, Mr. Duffy and Mr. Musk have tussled over the Artemis
III mission. Currently scheduled for mid-2027, it is to land NASA
astronauts on the lunar surface in the south polar region.

SpaceX has a contract to adapt its Starship spacecraft to serve as a
moon lander. But it is looking increasingly likely that Starship, with
its immense size and complexity, will not be ready for quite a few
years. Instead, an astronaut from China, which is aiming for its first
moon landing by 2030, could be the next person to set foot there.

Mr. Duffy, who has vowed that the United States will win this
21st-century space race, announced he would reopen the Artemis III
lander contract to seek a simpler, faster solution.

Mr. Musk then mocked Mr. Duffy. "Sean Dummy is trying to kill NASA!"
he wrote in one post on X.  "The person responsible for America's
space program can't have a 2 digit IQ," he wrote in another.

How Mr. Isaacman will handle the Artemis III lander will almost
certainly be a topic of questioning when he again faces the senators of
the Commerce Committee. Although he is considered an ally of Mr. Musk's,
Mr. Duffy has also been supportive of other aerospace companies,
including Blue Origin, the rocket company started by Jeff Bezos.

Blue Origin has proposed to NASA a lander design that it says could be
built more quickly for Artemis III.

Behind the scenes, Mr. Duffy and Mr. Isaacman have been jockeying to
gain lasting control of NASA.

After The Wall Street Journal reported that Mr. Duffy would like to
become the agency's permanent administrator, a NASA spokeswoman said
Mr. Duffy had only been suggesting that NASA become part of the
Department of Transportation. She said that it might benefit from
being part of a cabinet-level organization.

Even some of Mr. Duffy's Republican supporters were leery of shifting
NASA under the transportation department, noting that NASA's mandates
were broader than sending people to space.

Over the past month, Republicans including Senator Tim Sheehy of Montana
and Laura Loomer, a far-right influencer, have been calling for Mr.
Trump to reverse course again and nominate Mr. Isaacman a second time.

Mr. Trump also praised Mr. Duffy on Tuesday for filling in at NASA.
"Sean Duffy has done an incredible job as interim administrator of the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration," Mr. Trump wrote.

Mr. Duffy, in turn, thanked Mr. Trump and congratulated
Mr. Isaacman. "I wish him all the success and will ensure the
transition is seamless,"  Mr. Duffy wrote on X.


11/6/25: 

From fyi@aipcomm.org Thu Nov  6 17:03:23 2025
Date: Thu, 6 Nov 2025 17:03:08
From: FYI <fyi@aipcomm.org>
To: rwo@virginia.edu
Subject: Leaked NASA Manifesto Hints at Isaacman’s Vision for Science

FYI: Science Policy News from AIP
BULLETIN
November 6, 2025

Leaked NASA Manifesto Hints at Isaacman’s Vision for Science
Lindsay McKenzie

Jared Isaacman has been renominated to lead NASA, and a document outlining his
vision for the agency has been leaked to the press.


Commercial astronaut and billionaire Jared Isaacman is again in the running to
lead NASA following his renomination by President Donald Trump on Tuesday.
Trump selected Isaacman to lead NASA back in December, but pulled his nomination
in June “after a thorough review of prior associations,” which may have referred
to Isaacman’s donations to Democrat politicians, or his close ties to Elon Musk
and SpaceX. Transportation Secretary Sean Duffy has served as NASA’s acting
administrator since July.

Shortly before the announcement of Isaacman’s renomination, Ars Technica and
Politico reported that they had obtained a 62-page document outlining Isaacman’s
vision for NASA, which he prepared while his first nomination was pending in the
Senate.

The full text of Isaacman’s NASA manifesto, known as Project Athena, has not
been shared publicly, but snippets shared by media outlets and Isaacman hint at
his vision for NASA science and the future of the agency.
In a statement on X, Isaacman verified the plan was his but declined to share it
publicly, saying, “I just don’t think the space community needs to debate
line-by-line while NASA and the rest of the government are going through a
shutdown.”

Isaacman’s plan for NASA is organized around five main ideas: reorganizing the
agency to reduce bureaucracy, putting more American astronauts in space,
figuring out how to “extract more value from space than we put in,” using NASA
as a “force multiplier for science,” and investing in technology and resources
for the future.

Isaacman wrote on X that his plans for science include leveraging NASA’s
resources to “increase the frequency of missions, reduce costs, and empower
academic institutions to contribute to real discovery missions.” He added, “The
idea is to get some of that $1 trillion in university endowments into the fight,
alongside NASA, to further science and discovery.”

    [Sounds like he wants university COST-SHARING ON ACTUAL MISSION
     IMPLEMENTATION!]

NASA’s Commercial Lunar Payload Services (CLPS) program, through which NASA
hires companies to send small robotic landers and rovers to the Moon, could be
used as a model for all of planetary science to “accelerate discovery and reduce
time-to-science,” Isaacman wrote, adding that it would be “better to have 10 x
$100 million missions and a few fail than a single overdue and costly $1B+
mission.” He echoed this sentiment in the All-In Podcast earlier this year,
saying, “Why do we accept things taking 10 years when they could be a year? Even
the decadal process of prioritizing scientific missions over a 10-year span is
kind of insane.”

Isaacman’s plan also embraces PURCHASING EARTH SCIENCE DATA FROM COMMERCIAL
PROVIDERS. “I know the ‘science-as-a-service’ concept got people fired up, but
that was specifically called out in the plan for Earth observation, from
companies that already have constellations like Planet, BlackSky, etc,” Isaacman
said on X. “Why build bespoke satellites at greater cost and delay when you
could pay for the data as needed from existing providers and repurpose the funds
for more planetary science missions (as an example)?”

Isaacman’s plan also recommends that NASA TERMINATE ITS SPACE LAUNCH SYSTEM and
the Gateway lunar space station after the planned Artemis II and Artemis III
missions, eventually incorporating elements of the programs into a nuclear
propulsion program. During the All-In Podcast, Isaacman also CRITICIZED THE
ROBOTIC MARS SAMPLE RETURN MISSION, suggesting that NASA should redirect those
resources toward private companies that can support a crewed Mars mission.

On the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Isaacman’s post said he would like to look at
overlaps between the work of the lab and its contractors, and denied ever
suggesting that the U.S. could do without JPL, adding, “I have publicly defended
programs like the Chandra X-ray Observatory, offered to fund a Hubble reboost
mission, and anything suggesting I am anti-science or want to outsource that
responsibility is simply untrue.”

Rumors that the so-called Project Athena document was leaked to the press to
hinder Isaacman’s nomination and keep Duffy in control of NASA were framed as an
unfortunate “distraction” by Isaacman in his X post. He also added context on
his relationship with Duffy in the post, stating that “if there is any friction,
I suspect it is more political operators causing the controversy.”

How long it will take for Isaacman to secure Senate confirmation to lead NASA is
unclear. The White House has yet to formally submit his nomination to the
Senate, where he may face another nomination hearing and fresh questions about
his NASA plans.



                     NASA IN TURMOIL

11/6/25: WP.  NASA has lost thousands of workers. Here’s what that
  means for science.  / Staffers told The Post about months of turmoil
  and sweeping changes that, if fully implemented, could transform
  NASA and American science beyond the Trump years.

URL:https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/11/06/nasa-cuts-departures-isaacman/

By Kasha Patel <https://www.washingtonpost.com/people/kasha-patel/>
and 
Hannah Natanson <https://www.washingtonpost.com/people/hannah-natanson/>


For 13 consecutive years, NASA has been named the “Best Place to Work
in the Federal Government" among large agencies. But since the Trump
administration took over and proposed deep budget cuts, there has been
an exodus from the agency — with many of those who remain feeling
demoralized and unsure about the future of their work.

The low morale may be an unanticipated challenge for billionaire
entrepreneur Jared Isaacman, should he be confirmed as NASA
administrator. President Donald Trump nominated Isaacman
— again — on Tuesday, five months after abruptly withdrawing his
nomination. A lot has shifted in that time.

A dozen current and former employees, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity for fear of retribution, described months of turmoil and
sweeping changes that, if fully implemented, could transform NASA and
American science beyond the Trump years.

“You have people questioning their future with the agency, with their
contractor, with their company,” said Jack Kiraly, director of
government relations at the Planetary Society, a nonprofit.

Kiraly also expressed concern for the tens of thousands of students who
may turn away from scientific fields and be discouraged “over the sort
of the upheaval that’s happened at NASA and other science agencies.”

More than 360 former and current employees have signed an open letter
<https://www.standupforscience.net/nasa-voyager-declaration> voicing
concern that the cuts and mass departures are increasing safety risks
for space missions.

“I think NASA has always been an exceptional agency, filled with
exceptional people doing exceptional things. And yet we are just getting
decimated,” one NASA employee said. “What was so fundamentally broken
that we needed to get to this point?”

NASA spokesperson Bethany Stevens said that the changes and cuts at the
agency have been mischaracterized and that no one is deprioritizing safety.

“NASA remains committed to our mission as we work within a more
prioritized budget,” she said in a statement.

Trump speaks at the Kennedy Space Center after a successful SpaceX
launch on May 30, 2020. (Saul Martinez/Getty Images)

In May, Trump proposed a budget of $18.8 billion for NASA, a 25
percent decrease from the previous year — and the smallest NASA budget
since the start of human spaceflight in 1961, according to the
Planetary Society.

Trump’s budget proposed cutting NASA’s science funding by about half and
reducing its staff to one-third of its workforce.

Although no budget has been approved by Congress, and the Senate and
House versions don’t make such drastic cuts to the broadly popular
agency, many former and current employees say NASA’s leadership has
appeared to be operating as if the president’s proposal were**in effect.

That has meant a hyperfocus on work for getting astronauts back to the
moon, the employees said. Meanwhile, the president’s budget puts more
than 40 current and planned space missions — largely related to climate
and Earth science work — on the chopping block.

“Basically, anything that supports human life on Earth is
deprioritized,”**one worker said.

NASA officials rebutted the idea that the president’s budget proposal
has been enacted before authorization.

“NASA’s leadership has been clear that depending on the action taken by
Congress, the agency should prepare for different scenarios, including a
continuing resolution,” Stevens said, adding that there has been “no
guidance stating that the [president’s budget request] will become the
operating plan for NASA prior to Congressional authorization of a budget.”

Amid shifting priorities and uncertain funding, NASA reported at the end
of July that at least 4,000 civil servants — about a fifth of the civil
staff — were leaving. More people have left since then,**and the numbers
are even higher if counting departures of contractors, who make up a
large portion of the NASA workforce.

The agency hasn’t seen such a small civilian staff since 1960,
according to the Planetary Society.

Some of the departures have been in response to separation and early
retirement offers. While the packages were “voluntary,” employees were
told they may be reassigned, transferred involuntarily or denied
severance benefits if they didn’t take the package, according to an
anonymous memo submitted to several inspector general offices.

Workers have left from nearly every corner of NASA — scientists with
missions related to the moon, Mars, astrobiology and Earth sciences, as
well as in engineering, finance and communications. Many departed
workers were very senior, staffers said, holding important institutional
knowledge.

“No one feels confident that anything planned further than a few months
will be executed; no one feels confident that more job cuts aren’t
coming; no one feels confident that today’s priorities and next year’s
or even next week’s will align,” an employee said.


    Prioritizing the moon

Like across much of the federal government, the mood at NASA started to
change when tech entrepreneur Elon Musk launched the U.S. DOGE Service
and sent representatives to the agency early this year.

Some directives were unusual. On one floor at NASA headquarters, workers
were told to remove symbols or flags that weren’t American flags — it
was verbally made clear that this applied to rainbow symbols and flags.

Other actions affected the agency’s**core work. A handful of employees
had to reevaluate about 5,000 science grants that were already awarded,
said David Grinspoon, who was NASA’s senior scientist for astrobiology
strategy. In a matter of days, he and his colleagues had to provide a
justification for how the grants served the public.

The change in environment and tone was unsettling, said Grinspoon, who
was no longer employed at the agency at the end of September. He said it
was unclear where the directives were coming from or whether leaders
were having their arms twisted.

“One thing I’ve always loved about NASA is this sense of teamwork and
people being mission-focused ... and along with that, there was a lot of
trust between leadership,” he said. “A lot of that trust started to get
eroded.”

More dramatic changes followed the president’s budget proposal in the
spring.

“As early as June 2025, NASA began ‘implementing immediately’ certain
‘institutional changes’ to align with the President’s proposed budget
— which carries no force of law,” a Senate Democratic staff report
concluded in late September.

The report, the NASA spokesperson said, is unsubstantiated, and the
authors did not reach out to fact-check the report with the agency ahead
of releasing it.

The Trump administration has been transparent about prioritizing one
area: making sure America gets back to the moon before China, with a
longer-term goal of building a permanent base there.

What’s known as the Artemis program has continued to receive funding and
largely been spared staffing cuts, said one employee associated with the
program. Political appointees have urged those involved to move faster.

Unlike some other agency missions, work on Artemis has continued
during the government shutdown.

The support will continue if Isaacman becomes the head of NASA. In a
post on X this week, he endorsed “the energy and focus on the Moon”
while acknowledging the near-term difficulties for NASA and talked up
the role commercial providers and private capital are playing.

Overall, an employee said, the Trump administration has been good for
human spaceflight — “which I struggle with,” he said. “Because what that
means is everything that is not putting humans on the moon is falling by
the wayside.”


    The impact of NASA cuts

Among the initiatives that have lost support and significantly slowed,
one NASA worker noted, are programs that help respond to floods, track
fires and forecast what will happen long-term to the world’s oceans,
ecosystems and crops as the planet warms. The NASA Goddard Institute for
Space Studies, which does climate-focused work, lost the lease
<https://www.cnn.com/2025/04/24/climate/nasa-lease-canceled-columbia>
for**its New York City building.

In the aeronautics division, a project designed to test and develop a
new generation of hybrid electric-powered aircraft is being phased out,
according to staff members. Other aeronautical projects have been
reduced in scope.

Astrophysics, planetary science and solar sciences are also in limbo
although some projects that were told in July to prepare “contingency
closeout” plans — such as the Osiris-Apex mission studying an asteroid
passing close to Earth in 2029 — have secured funding for the
immediate future.

The cuts have hit NASA headquarters hard. The Office of the Chief
Scientist; the Office of Technology, Policy and Strategy; and the
diversity, equity, inclusion and accessibility branch in the Office of
Diversity and Equal Opportunity have been shuttered.

Beyond Washington, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California,
home to much Mars and Earth science research, laid off 550 people in
October as part of the agency reorganization. Its director stepped
downin June.

Perhaps the largest cuts have occurred at NASA Goddard in Maryland, home
to “the nation’s largest organization of scientists, engineers, and
technologists,” according to its website. If the president’s budget is
followed completely, the center could lose about half of its civil workers.

Goddard’s director, who was previously at Ball Aerospace, left
abruptly on Aug. 1 without a clear explanation.

Morale among employees is the lowest anyone can remember, staff said.
One Goddard employee expressed feeling a sort of survivor’s guilt for
colleagues in Earth sciences and other affected areas.

Goddard’s physical campus is expected to contract by March to save
money, closing numerous engineering labs, a key science building that
houses solar research, maintenance shops, the only full cafeteria and an
on-site child development center for employees.

Stevens, the NASA spokesperson, said that 40 percent of office space at
Goddard was vacant after people took the voluntary separation programs,
but that the agency was still paying to maintain the space. She said a
plan to consolidate the center’s buildings was also approved years ago.

But employees say the building moves are happening on a hastier timeline
— months instead of years — and putting flight hardware and labs at risk.

“We heard a story about someone who had to go dumpster diving and only
got back some of their stuff because others took it upon themselves to
frantically get rid of everything,” said a memo written by and
circulated among employees.

The changes at NASA are coming at a time when the entire space industry
is changing. Commercial spaceflight and satellites have boomed in recent
years, raising questions about how NASA might redefine its role, said
Scott Pace, a space policy expert at George Washington University’s
Elliott School of International Affairs.

“A lot of the skills we’ve had in the past [at NASA], that’s not what we
need now,” Pace said. “We do need other skills to integrate, oversee,
manage and architect commercial and international and government
partners to do exploration and science/./”

But NASA staff, he said, need clearer direction, informed by realistic
expectations about what work can reasonably be picked up by the private
sector or academia.

The newly renominated Isaacman has proposed sending astronauts into
space more frequently, adding more science missions in more
cost-effective ways and partnering with commercial vendors, for
instance. He wrote on X on Tuesday that his plan “never favored any
one vendor, never recommended closing centers, or directed the
cancellation of programs before objectives were achieved.”

“The plan valued human exploration as much as scientific discovery,” he
said.

------

130*Comments*

AI summary: The comments express significant concern and criticism
regarding the Trump administration's impact on NASA, particularly its
science programs. Many commenters highlight the administration's
perceived disdain for science, leading to budget cuts and a loss of
institutional knowledge, which they fear will set back American
leadership in space and science. There is also a sentiment that these
actions benefit private companies like SpaceX and Blue Origin, while
potentially ceding space leadership to countries like China. Some
comments suggest that the administration's focus on returning to the
moon is misguided compared to the value of Earth science missions

As lots of institutional knowledge is escorted out the door, America
loses as our leadership in science is gutted. In pilot lingo, it is
“controlled flight into terrain” which means flying perfectly good
airplane into the ground. It endangers flight safety of our
astronauts, and these Russel Vought sponsored cutbacks will lead to a
new dark age in space sciences. The cancellation of Earth and
Planetary Science programs demonstrates the ineptitude of this
Administration. How can you study other worlds if you can’t understand
the processes on and about the Earth? The entire effort of the
partisans is an unforced error by people who know not what they
do. The contempt toward science shown by the Project 2025 crowd will
set this country back for years. The USA will have another Sputnik
Moment when we look hopelessly inept having intentionally fumbled the
ball and given up the lead. There was a time not too long ago where
science was largely nonpartisan. Maybe the billionaires should fund
science as philanthropy and a stopgap. Billionaires funded large
observatories in the early 1900s. The do nothing Congress must step in
and save NASA and its science budget (along with NOAA and other
science based agencies) before it is too late. China is investing in
the future, and the USA is living in the past on borrowed time.

“Basically, anything that supports human life on earth is
deprioritized,” There’s your Republican motto right there.

My husband is a contractor at NASA. He comes home every day with news
of the mass exodus of senior people who were near retirement age and
just decided it was not worth fight anymore. He is currently in the
process (being considered an essential worker) of taking two labs his
project formerly had and consolidating them into a smaller overall
space. It makes me angry and sad to see what is happening
there. Science in this country is in a terrible decline and I mourn
for the future.

I am one of those senior engineers, a contractor with 42 years at
Goddard that got the axe due to budget cuts. The loss of experienced
people is very real there and I can attest to the destruction of a
once incredible morale.

Absolutely tragic. NASA makes / made America exceptional. The Earth
programs alone, with their contributions to weather forecasting,
agriculture, forest fire science, ocean research, famine and disease
prediction, and climate are worth the entire budget

Trust me, that is the #1 place where Trump-republicans WANT to cut
funding. They don't want us pesky scientists showing them piece after
piece of evidence showing that climate change is real. And since even
those of us earth scientists who aren't directly studying climate
change are impacted by it, there's no way around it.  Ie: I'm doing a
study now on the drift of the Earth's pole (the pole it spins around)
over time. This is impacted by any change in the Earth's mass/density
structure. When water or solid land moves from one spot to another, it
impacts the spinning pole of the Earth. Now, I'm not studying climate
change per se, but when I look at the impact on polar wander due to
mass motion in Greenland and Antarctica... well, let's just say it's
really hard to explain if you don't discuss climate change.  This is
not what Trump wants to hear.

The Space Shuttle Challenger exploded in mid air because of a design
flaw from a decade earlier. I fear that this gutting of NASA will have
consequences for years to come.

Bullcrap. There’s “no guidance” on this because leaders at Goddard
have been forcing employees to adopt the president’s budget request
WITHOUT PUTTING IT IN WRITING because they know anything written can
be challenged in court. Hide the receipts, and you can verbally force
your employees to make drastic, illegal cuts without any legal
pushback, as long as you do the damage quickly enough like they have
with the building closures.

     It's not just at Goddard. It's been the strategy at at least 4
     other centers as well. I can understand the approach - the center
     directors can see the hostility to their mission as well as
     anyone and they'd rather prepare for the worst. Unfortunately,
     that helped send their most experienced engineers to the exit. At
     least some of the engineers are hoping to come back if the budget
     picture improves.

I took the buyout, not retirement age but seeing the end game. Wasting
days nay weeks writing justifications for continuing to fund highly
competitively-awarded, peer-reviewed investigations was just a low
point in 8 months of the morale-destroying gutting of NASA's science
mission. Industry doesn't do this stuff, and boosting a 30+ year old
mission that is way past its prime does nothing for the future of US
science and technology leadership. RIP Science at NASA.

I have done work for NASA. Ironically, many of their employees are die
hard Republicans so I have to laugh at the irony.  Trump destroys
everything and now maybe they will finally open their eyes.

     My brother is a long time NASA employee. As a die hard MAGA his
     eyes are still firmly closed. Out of six siblings he’s the only
     MAGA. We don’t know what to make of him.

The situation at NASA is another example of the braindrain happening
in America , especially science. America is not becoming great again,
but rather dragged downward. Look for other nations, perhaps not
allies, to be the leaders of our new century.

The story of Trump’s devastation of the American scientific enterprise
should be at the top of the fold every day everywhere. It’s very
possible this will be his most lasting and ruinous gift to a country
that until his inauguration towered over the rest of the world in
scientific discovery and development. Why anyone on any side of the
aisle would think we should degrade, for generations to come, the most
advanced and productive research endeavor in history - the thing the
rest of the world most admired and envied about us - is beyond
me. It’s so painful to watch - unless you’re China.

As reported in this article, what has happened to Goddard Space Flight
Center in Greenbelt, MD is shocking. I remember my first job out of
college was working at GSFC in Building 3, Room 137. Some things you
just don’t forget. The engineering, technical, and scientific
expertise built up over the last 50+ years has been torn down in 10
months. They say elections have consequences. Who voted for this one?
There’s another story behind this one that involves the contractors
(many of whom are small businesses) who showed up every day to work
with their government counterparts. Someone needs to tell their story.

When you put nihilistic vandals in charge, things get wrecked. 

I worked for two decades in the NASA Office of Diversity and Equal
Opportunity. We sought not only to help create the best and most
talented workforce from across the country, but to create more and
more efficient avenues for reporting sexual and other forms of
harassment, and to better ensure that NASA-funded STEM programs at
universities were affording equal opportunities regardless of race or
sex. Now all of the work of equal opportunity and civil rights has
been destroyed, not just at NASA but across the federal
government. Whole offices and agencies that sought to ensure EO for
people with disabilities, or older workers, and yes, women and
racial/ethnic minorities, have been shuttered and why? So that that
most oppressed of minorities, the straight, white, Christian, male,
can no longer be discriminated against as he has been historically in
America? “Of all the things at risk, the loss of an objective reality
is perhaps the most dangerous.”


             --- ENDD NASA IN TURMOIL ---



11/7/25:  Van Scoyoc newsletter.


                                  Health

Appeals court judges seem skeptical of Trump administration’s defense
of capping NIH overhead Federal appeals court judges’ questions and
comments during a hearing Wednesday suggested they may be skeptical of
some of the Trump administration’s central arguments in a lawsuit
challenging its proposed changes to research overhead payments. The
case revolves around a multibillion dollar question: Did the National
Institutes of Health, the nation’s premier funder of biomedical
research, violate federal law in an announced plan to slash support
for research overhead? Read more:  STAT News

FDA’s top drug regulator resigns after federal officials probe
‘serious concerns’ about his conduct The head of the Food and Drug
Administration’s drug center abruptly resigned Sunday after federal
officials began reviewing “serious concerns about his personal
conduct,” according to a government spokesperson.  Dr. George
Tidmarsh, who was named to the FDA post in July, was placed on leave
Friday after officials in the Department of Health and Human Services’
Office of General Counsel were notified of the issues. The departure
came the same day that a drugmaker connected to one of Tidmarsh’s
former business associates filed a lawsuit alleging that he made
“false and defamatory statements,” during his time at the FDA. Read
more:  AP News


                                     Energy

Energy Department announces $625M for quantum research centers The
Department of Energy announced $625 million in funding Tuesday to
renew five quantum research centers. Each research center is set to
receive $125 million in funding over the next five years, as they
study different facets of quantum science and technology, which rely
on the principles of quantum mechanics. Quantum research received a
boost during President Trump’s first term with the passage of the
National Quantum Initiative Act in 2018, allocating $1.2 billion to
the newly created research centers and other quantum efforts. Read
more:  The Hill

Dept. of Energy directs $100 million to modernize declining coal
plants The U.S.  Department of Energy has announced up to $100 million
in federal funding for projects modernizing the nation’s remaining
coal plants, nearly half of which were slated to close by 2030. Last
Friday, U.S. Secretary of Energy Chris Wright issued the Notice of
Funding Opportunity, calling for applications to design, implement, or
test refurbishments and retrofit systems that allow coal plants to
“operate more efficiently, reliably, and affordably.” Read more: 
Inside Climate News

                                  Space   

Trump renominates Musk ally Jared Isaacman to run NASA months after
withdrawal President Donald Trump has renominated Jared Isaacman to
run NASA after pulling his prior nomination months ago due to what the
president called a “thorough review of prior associations.” Isaacman,
who is friends with Tesla CEO Elon Musk, was originally picked to lead
NASA in December, before Trump had even taken office. Isaacman is a
billionaire who founded payments company Shift4 and has led two
private spaceflights. But Trump pulled the nomination in late May
after a spat between the president and Musk. Read more:  CNBC   US
slams ‘discriminatory’ draft EU space law as imperiling NATO
cooperation The US has come out swinging against a draft law by the
European Union that Washington claims would establish restrictive
market barriers, impose costly environmental protection requirements,
and create regulatory hurdles for US commercial firms — thus
undermining bilateral, as well as NATO-wide, cooperation. The US
“expresses deep concern regarding measures in the proposed Act that
would impose unacceptable regulatory burdens on U.S. providers of
space services to European customers,” the State Department charges in
a document submitted to the EU on Tuesday. Read more:  Breaking
Defense


                      Fundamental Science and Engineering

Top Democrat challenges US budget chief over science cuts as Beijing
boosts research Cuts to federal research would weaken America’s
scientific edge against Beijing, said Raja Krishnamoorthi, the top
Democrat on the US House committee focused on China, who is pressing
budget chief Russ Vought on whether his office has assessed their
impact. “While the United States is dismantling the very foundations
that have sustained our STEM and innovation leadership for
generations, Beijing has announced its plans to continue accelerating
its investments in science, technology, and innovation,”
Krishnamoorthi wrote to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
director on Tuesday, according to a letter seen by the South China
Morning Post. Read more: South China Morning Post

All government shutdowns disrupt science − in 2025, the consequences
extend far beyond a lapse in funding This shutdown arrives at a time
of massive upheaval to American science and innovation driven by
President Donald Trump’s ongoing attempts to extend executive
power and assert political control of scientific institutions,
according to Kenneth Evans of Rice University. With the shutdown
entering its fifth week, and with no end in sight, the Trump
administration’s rapid and contentious changes to federal research
policy are rewriting the social contract between the U.S. government
and research universities – where the government provides funding and
autonomy in exchange for the promise of downstream public benefits. In
the context of broader policy reforms to federal grantmaking, student
and high-skilled immigration, and scientific integrity, this
shutdown has both known and unknown consequences for the future of
U.S. science. Read more:  Yahoo News


                             Oceans and Atmosphere

NOAA cancels funding for data collection crucial to tsunami warning
systems The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is halting
a contract that makes it possible for the federal agency to accurately
monitor for potential tsunamis in Alaska — and quickly warn at-risk
communities. In late September, the federal agency advised the Alaska
Earthquake Center that it does not have funding available for that
work. “We are anticipating direct data feeds to stop in mid-November,”
said Mike West, the Alaska state seismologist and director of the
Alaska Earthquake Center, which is part of the University of Alaska
Fairbanks’ Geophysical Institute. Read more:  Anchorage Daily News



11/13/25: IHE.  Texas A&M Requires Approval for Courses That
 ‘Advocate’ Certain Ideologies / Many faculty members decried the new
 restrictions on race- and gender-related courses as an assault on
 academic freedom. Meanwhile, the board also discussed a
 once-per-semester systemwide course review process.

Courses that “advocate race or gender ideology, sexual orientation, or
gender identity” now require presidential approval at Texas A&M system
campuses, the system Board of Regents decided Thursday.

Faculty members and external advocacy groups say the new rules violate
academic freedom, and for many professors, questions remain about how
the policies will be implemented and enforced. Approved in a unanimous
vote after a lengthy public comment period, the policy changes fit a
pattern of censorship at Texas A&M that escalated after a video of a
student challenging an instructor about a lesson on gender identity
went viral, leading to the instructor’s firing and the resignation of
then-president Mark Welsh.

... It will also define “gender ideology” as “a concept of
self-assessed gender identity replacing, and disconnected from, the
biological category of sex.”  Similarly, “race ideology” is defined as
“a concept that attempts to shame a particular race or ethnicity,
accuse them of being oppressors in a racial hierarchy or conspiracy,
ascribe to them less value as contributors to society and public
discourse because of their race or ethnicity, or assign them intrinsic
guilt based on the actions of their presumed ancestors or relatives in
other areas of the world. This also includes course content that
promotes activism on issues related to race or ethnicity, rather than
academic instruction.”

A previous version of the revision proposed that no system academic
course will “teach” race or gender ideology, but the verb was changed
to “advocate” before the policies were presented formally to the full
board. It’s unclear how the system will differentiate between advocacy
and regular instruction on these topics.

...A second policy on “Academic Freedom, Responsibility and Tenure”
previously stated that “each faculty member is entitled to full
freedom in the classroom in discussing the subject that the faculty
member teaches, but a faculty member should not introduce a
controversial matter that has no relation to the classroom subject.”
The approved amendment adds that faculty members may not “teach
material that is inconsistent with the approved syllabus for the
course.”

...“This is not university-level education, it is cruelty and
political indoctrination in wolf’s clothing,” said Leonard Bright, a
professor of government and public service and president of the Texas
A&M College Station AAUP chapter. “I would need to tell my students
that ‘What you came here to learn, I’m unable to tell you, because I’m
restricted to tell you that information, even though such knowledge is
available at every major university in this world.’”

...Two faculty members—finance professor Adam Kolasinski and
biomedical engineering professor John Criscione—spoke in favor of the
policy changes.  “I don’t think somebody should be able to say that
Germans born two generations after the Holocaust somehow bear guilt
for the Holocaust, because that’s really what’s being prohibited
here,” Kolasinski said. “My colleagues seem to think that the policy
says something it doesn’t.” Kolasinski also suggested the board change
the language back from “advocate” to “teach.”

AAUP president Todd Wolfson urged the board to reject the proposed
policy changes in a statement Tuesday. So did Brian Evans, president
of the Texas Conference of the AAUP, which includes faculty at Texas
A&M campuses.  “By considering these policy changes, the Texas A&M
University System Board of Regents is telling faculty, ‘Shut up and
teach—and we’ll tell you what to teach,’” Evans said in the
statement. “This language and the censorship it imposes will cause
irreparable harm to the reputation of the university, and impede
faculty and students from their main mission on campus: to teach,
learn, think critically, and create and share new knowledge.”

In a Monday statement, FIRE officials wrote, “Hiring professors with
PhDs is meaningless if administrators are the ones deciding what gets
taught … Faculty would need permission to teach students about not
just modern controversies, but also civil rights, the Civil War, or
even ancient Greek comedies. This is not just bad policy. It invites
unlawful censorship, chills academic freedom, and undermines the core
purpose of a university. Faculty will start asking not ‘Is this
accurate?’ but ‘Will this get me in trouble?’ That’s not education,
it’s risk management.”


11/12/25:  FYI.   NASA Goddard Building Closures Draw Scrutiny

Sudden moves to shutter multiple buildings at the Greenbelt campus
have alarmed the top Democrat on the House Science Committee.

House Science Committee Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren (D-CA) is demanding
that NASA immediately halt the closure of multiple buildings on the
agency's Goddard campus.  "In recent days, my staff has received
disturbing reports that NASA is directing the imminent closure of
laboratories and facilities hosting mission-critical capabilities at
the Greenbelt, Maryland, campus of the Goddard Space Flight Center,"
Lofgren said in a letter to acting NASA Administrator Sean Duffy.  The
closures underway at Goddard "put essential hardware and capabilities
at great risk," Lofgren wrote, adding that the facilities facing
closure support many NASA flight missions, and include laboratories
essential to the completion of the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope.

"NASA must halt any and all laboratory, facility, and building closure
and relocation activities at Goddard as well as the relocation,
disposal, excessing, or repurposing of any specialized equipment or
mission-related capabilities, hardware, and systems, and it must do so
now," wrote Lofgren.  In the letter, dated Nov. 10, Lofgren demanded
that NASA respond in writing within 24 hours to confirm its
compliance. Science Committee Democratic staff said they had not
received a response as of Monday afternoon. The NASA press office did
not respond to a request for comment.  Lofgren also demanded that NASA
provide a "full accounting of the damage inflicted on Goddard thus
far" within seven days, and shared her intent to request an
investigation by the NASA Office of Inspector General.

LONG-TERM PLANS FOR MODERNIZATION

NASA's leadership has, across multiple presidential administrations,
pursued a long-running plan to modernize the Greenbelt campus and
reduce its footprint through building demolition, remodelling, and new
construction. The agency has reportedly justified its recent actions
as part of carrying out that plan. But those plans spanned 20 years,
and Lofgren claims the agency's "sudden rush" to close buildings is
out of line with what was originally proposed.  She cited reporting by
Space.com on a September email from Goddard management to employees
that said: "Unlike previous large-scale Center reconfigurations, which
occurred over a number of years, all planned moves will take place
over the next several months and will be completed by March of 2026."

Earlier this month, the Goddard Engineers, Scientists and Technicians
Association, a union representing NASA workers, published an update
stating the agency was in the process of closing 13 buildings on the
Goddard campus, including around 100 laboratories, with "extreme haste
and no transparent strategy.  Tens or hundreds of millions of dollars
of taxpayer-funded NASA property and laboratories are at risk of
either being discarded, mishandled, or out-of-commission for
significant time periods.  Unique and critical US and NASA
capabilities are being abandoned without consultation with NASA
employees (e.g., mission leads, subject-matter experts), NASA agency
leads, Congress, or the public," the GESTA statement reads.  The
building closures on the Goddard campus will hinder high-profile
missions such as Roman and Dragonfly, GESTA said.

Additionally, the union reports that NASA employees are being
pressured to move with minimal notice and "discard valuable
equipment and flight hardware they have dedicated years to.
Goddard management had previously agreed during union bargaining to
halt moves until adequate laboratory space had been identified but
they are reneging on those agreements," the union said,
adding that conducting the closures during the government shutdown
might be illegal under the Antideficiency Act, which defines what
activities federal agencies may carry out during a lapse in
appropriations.  

GESTA said NASA is justifying the Goddard closures as cost-saving, but
that "no details are being provided and any short-term savings are
unlikely to offset a full account of moving costs and the reduced
ability to complete NASA missions."  The union noted that the agency
was still paying rent on the Goddard Institute for Space Studies in
New York, which had its lease terminated in May.  The agency also
closed the Goddard Visitor Center in Greenbelt in October.  Goddard's
Greenbelt campus hosts the largest concentration of NASA scientists in
the agency. The campus houses the agency's Science Mission
Directorate, as well as the Engineering and Technology Directorate,
and has a large Earth and climate science footprint.

FUTURE OUTLOOK FOR GODDARD

Congress has yet to determine NASA's budget for fiscal year 2026. In
April, the White House Office of Management and Budget proposed a 47%
cut to NASA science that would disrupt many projects underway at
Goddard, including the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. At the time,
Sen. Chris Van Hollen (D-MD), the leading Democrat on the Commerce,
Justice, Science appropriations subcommittee, said the plans would
"gut" NASA Goddard and the Science Mission Directorate. In October,
Democrats on the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation
Committee accused the Trump administration of illegally reducing
spending at NASA in line with the White House budget request.
President Donald Trump s nominee to lead NASA, Jared Isaacman, wrote
in a leaked manifesto for the agency seen by FYI, that many field
sites under the Goddard banner, including GISS in New York and the
Katherine Johnson Independent Verification and Validation facility in
Fairmont, West Virginia, represent "opportunities for deletion,
consolidation or at a minimum standardization for efficiency." In a
section about Goddard, Isaacman also said he wished to "evaluate
dispersion of mission control centers vs Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Johnson Space Center, Marshall Space Flight Center with the aim to
consolidate at JSC."   In a statement on X, Isaacman said parts of his
leaked plan had been misinterpreted by the media, and stressed he
never recommended closing centers, or directed the cancellation of
programs before objectives were achieved.


11/14/25: FYI.  Science Agencies Face Backlogs Following Record-long
Shutdown /The shutdown had wide-ranging effects on research funding
and the federal science workforce.

President Donald Trump signed a bill to reopen the government
Wednesday night, ending the longest federal shutdown in
history. Federal agencies are set to reopen, allowing intramural
research activities and extramural research awards to resume. The
funding bill keeps the government open through the end of January, at
which point another shutdown is possible.

Krystal Toups, the director for contracts and grants administration at
COGR, said the organization is “hopeful that the reopening will
largely mark a return to business as usual,” but that it anticipates
agencies will take some time to clear backlogs of proposal reviews and
grant-related requests.

The 44-day shutdown had notable effects on research funds at agencies
and universities and on the federal science workforce. Science
agencies furloughed most of their staff, halting additional
disbursements of grant funding to universities and many internal
research activities. Brian Stone, acting director of the National
Science Foundation, issued a memo to staff on Thursday saying the
agency would prioritize “restoring our capacity to make awards” over
the next several days and anticipated taking “a few weeks” to resume
reviews of pending solicitations, panels, and travel.

“We cannot recover the time missed during the lapse, which means we
cannot conduct all the programs and activities that we had originally
planned for FY 2026,” the memo adds.

The National Nuclear Security Administration furloughed staff for the
first time in the agency’s history. Meanwhile, the Trump
administration used more than $9 billion in research funds from the
Department of Defense to continue paying military personnel through
the shutdown.

The administration tried to permanently reduce the federal workforce
during the shutdown, issuing hundreds of reduction-in-force notices to
staff at the Department of Energy, U.S. Geological Survey, and other
agencies. The notices were blocked in court, and the funding bill that
ended the shutdown also nullified any notices issued since the
beginning of the shutdown and blocked any RIFs through the end of
January.

The Department of Justice requested stays in multiple court cases
related to university grant reinstatements, though it appears that
most grants to Harvard University and the University of California
system were restored before or during the shutdown.

Some universities, including Georgia Tech, the University of Georgia,
and North Carolina State University, told researchers a few weeks into
the shutdown to limit nonessential spending, including travel and
supplies. Georgia Tech told its faculty on Thursday that the school
will lift its cost-saving measures starting Monday.

Before the shutdown ended, one researcher at NCSU, who requested
anonymity because he feared retribution, said the university
implemented the measures to ensure it could continue paying
researchers and staff. Many graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers receive their paychecks through federal funds, and the
university was drawing on its cash reserves to pay them through the
shutdown, he said.

The researcher added that federal reimbursements for research at his
institution were “down to a fraction” because agencies were generally
unable to release funds. NSF, a major funder of university research,
said work could continue during the shutdown on any awards that still
had funds available and did not need intervention from federal
staff. However, most

The funding situation is complicated further for some grantees whose
current allocation ended at the end of the fiscal year and was
expected to be renewed on or after Oct. 1. “We don’t know if we have
authorization to spend the money we had budgeted for the upcoming
fiscal year,” said Luke Oeding, a researcher at Auburn
University. “There are some limited options at the university to spend
funds in anticipation of the new money coming in, however, that is a
risky move if we don’t know what will happen with the grants after the
government reopens, and we could end up spending money that we can’t
get reimbursed.”

That uncertainty left the researchers in a “holding pattern”
throughout the shutdown, Oeding added, unable to commit to things like
providing graduate students with stipends during the summer term in
2026. The uncertainty has also held back his team’s progress, he said,
because they are unsure if their current project will eventually
receive funding or if they should be planning to work on something
different.

The shutdown also prevented Oeding’s team from getting academic
articles publicly released because they are pending review from the
Air Force Research Lab, which is funding the work.

Even though the shutdown has ended, the NCSU researcher said, “it’s
not like we’re done and back to normal, because grant reviews have not
happened, new batches of funding have not been sent. The longer you
wait, the bigger those cumulative effects get, and the harder they are
to come back from.”  Have a news tip for us? Contact the author on
Signal at clarezhang.54 or via email at czhang@aip.org.

More From AIP

NASA Goddard Building Closures Draw Scrutiny

NOV 12, 2025

Sudden moves to shutter multiple buildings at the Greenbelt campus have alarmed
the top Democrat on the House Science Committee.
The A.D. White Reading Room in Uris Library at Cornell University.

The Week of November 10, 2025

NOV 10, 2025

- Cornell makes deal for funding
- Government shutdown may end
- DOE renews quantum research centers
President Trump speaks in front of a posterboard that reads "Golden Dome for
America."

Lawmakers Seek Next Steps on Golden Dome

NOV 07, 2025

Republicans are appropriating billions for the project despite skepticism from
Democrats.


11/17/25: FYI.  NSF moving to USPTO campus / OSTP and NOAA nominees
 face vote / Academies to discuss nuclear space travel

A satellite map showing the plan to move NSF from its current headquarters to a
building on the USPTO campus.

NSF RELOCATING TO USPTO CAMPUS

The National Science Foundation is moving from its dedicated 19-story
headquarters in Alexandria, Virginia, to a smaller office building on
the U.S.  Patent and Trademark Office campus a few blocks away, the
General Services Administration announced Friday.

The Trump administration announced back in June that the Department of
Housing and Urban Development would take over the NSF headquarters,
but gave no indication of where NSF might end up, prompting concern
that the agency and its staff could be forced out of Virginia.

News that the agency will stay in Alexandria has been welcomed by
local politicians and NSF chief of staff Brian Stone, the top official
at the agency since its director resigned in April.

“This relocation enables the U.S. National Science Foundation to
remain in Alexandria while making responsible use of federal
facilities and supporting the needs of our workforce and the research
community,” Stone said in a press release. “Co-location with the
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office will also strengthen both of our
abilities to translate discoveries to innovation,” he added.

An NSF employee who asked to remain anonymous out of fear of
retaliation told FYI that NSF staff are “outraged by the move.”

“It is not justified by any logic or savings,” the employee said. “The
costs of moving are large, the building is smaller, and not equipped
to meet our needs.  In addition, we have lost a lot of staff this
year, and we have just emerged from a record-long shutdown. Catching
up and returning to normal will take a long time — time now
additionally perturbed by the move.”

NSF moved to its current headquarters in 2017. The building was
custom-built for NSF, with approximately 690,000 square feet of office
space. The Randolph Building at 401 Dulany Street, where NSF is
moving, has about 380,000 square feet of office space. USPTO vacated
the building as a result of efforts to downsize the agency’s footprint
that began in 2022.


NATIONAL ACADEMIES BOARDS TO HOLD MEETING ON SPACE

The Space Studies Board and the Board on Physics and Astronomy will hold a joint
meeting this week to discuss science philanthropy, public-private partnerships,
and AI for science, among other topics. Argonne Associate Director for
Computing, Environment and Life Sciences Rick Stevens and NASA Chief Science
Data Officer Kevin Murphy will present at the panel on AI for science. The
meeting will also cover a report funded by Idaho National Lab on flying a
fission reactor in space by 2030, outlining one option to demonstrate nuclear
electric propulsion by 2030 and two other lower-risk options. Jared Isaacman,
President Donald Trump’s nominee to lead NASA, has expressed a desire to make
nuclear electric propulsion a top priority for the agency.


11/21/25:  Van Scoyoc Newsletter

NIH grant cuts have disrupted hundreds of clinical trials, study finds 

   The second Trump administration has been defined by widespread cuts
   to federal spending, including at the National Institutes of Health
   (NIH). A new analysis reveals that the termination of NIH grants
   has disrupted at least 383 clinical trials, which collectively
   include more than 74,000 patients. The study, published on Nov. 17
   in JAMA Internal Medicine, is a stark example of the real-world
   repercussions of Trump’s health cuts. Read more:  Fierce Biotech

CDC says claims that vaccines do not cause autism are not evidence-based 

   The U.S.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention updated its
   website on Wednesday to say that claims about vaccines not causing
   autism are not "evidence-based." Vaccine skeptic and U.S. Health
   and Human Services Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. as well as
   U.S. President Donald Trump have promoted the theory - contrary to
   scientific evidence - that childhood vaccines are a cause of
   autism. But the CDC's website previously said "studies have shown
   there is no link between receiving vaccines and developing autism
   spectrum disorder." Read more:  Reuters

Energy Department cuts two major clean-energy offices 

   The Energy Department is eliminating two of its biggest offices
   that channeled billions of dollars into clean-energy projects,
   another step in President Trump’s efforts to put a chokehold on
   federal funds for technologies designed to reduce greenhouse-gas
   emissions. The DOE is cutting the Office of Clean Energy
   Demonstrations and the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable
   Energy, according to an organizational chart the DOE unveiled
   Thursday as the Trump administration moves to further unwind
   Biden-era climate policies and advance fossil-fuel projects. Read
   more:  WSJ


Totaling about $3 billion in unspent funds, the cuts by the Trump
administration reshaped science

   In 2025, more than 3,800 research grants from the National
   Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation were
   terminated or frozen as part of the Trump administration’s effort
   to realign funding priorities. As of November 2025, NIH has seen
   about $2.3 billion in unspent funds across nearly 2,500 grants
   frozen or terminated. At NSF, over 1,300 grants had about $700
   million in unspent funds cut. While this doesn’t capture the full
   extent of government cuts — science-focused agencies such NASA,
   NOAA and the EPA aren’t included — it does highlight the breadth of
   the reductions and the ripple effects likely to be felt throughout
   the scientific community for years to come.Bottom of Form The cuts
   — totaling about $3 billion in remaining funds — targeted
   initiatives related to diversity, equity and inclusion;
   environmental protection; vaccine hesitancy; public health and
   more. Read more:  Science News



11/26/25: FYI Trump Administration Overhauls CHIPS R&D Plans / The
Commerce Department is taking a “venture-capital approach” to funds
for the National Semiconductor Technology Center after shuttering
Natcast.

In late August, Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick announced he was
“clawing back” $7.4 billion from Natcast, a nonprofit created in 2023
to operate the National Semiconductor Technology Center, a
public-private consortium intended to support the U.S. semiconductor
industry. The administration has offered new details on its NSTC
overhaul, emphasizing its intent to use a single solicitation to
rapidly allocate billions of dollars.

In his publicly posted letter to then-CEO of Natcast Deirdre Hanford,
Lutnick argued that the Biden administration had broken the law by
giving agency authority to an outside body and criticized Natcast as a
“slush fund that did nothing but line the pockets of Biden loyalists.”

The National Institute of Standards and Technology has since issued a
broad solicitation for semiconductor research, which Deputy Secretary
of Commerce Paul Dabbar said will be “the primary mechanism” for the
department to make awards for the NSTC and other CHIPS R&D
programs. He added that the department will be “fully utilizing the
dollars appropriated” to CHIPS R&D and that “this process is intended
to be nimble and capable of moving on a business-like timeline.”  The
solicitation states that awardees may be required to issue royalties
or otherwise share revenue with the Commerce Department. NIST staff
said in the webinar that the agency “will mirror a more venture
capital-style approach” and “strongly recommended” that every
applicant “suggest an approach to a financial return on investment to
the American taxpayer” in their proposals. Proposals should seek at
least $10 million and will be accepted on a rolling basis through
Sept. 30, 2029, NIST staff said.

FYI spoke to five people who served on Natcast’s board of trustees or
oversaw Natcast while employed by federal agencies. All were granted
anonymity because they feared retaliation for criticizing the Trump
administration.  Two former Commerce officials said they believe
Lutnick will use the solicitation to accelerate product development at
private semiconductor companies in exchange for equity, instead of
focusing on high-risk, exploratory research. In August, the White
House took a stake in Intel and made a deal with Nvidia and AMD to
collect 15% of their revenue from chip sales to China. Lutnick has
also proposed taking a cut of university patents that result from
federally funded research.

Sources said major delays to Natcast’s work began from the start of
the Trump administration. A complete lack of approvals from Commerce
Department leadership prevented Natcast from moving forward with
finalizing their research agenda, new research awards, investment fund
plan, and plans for three flagship R&D facilities, one source said.

The funding for the three R&D facilities has been canceled, and
Lutnick now plans to use the Natcast funds for projects that will have
short-term achievements before the end of the Trump administration,
instead of continuing to establish an entity focused on long-term
issues for the industry, as Natcast’s creators envisioned, sources
said.

“I don’t know that there’s a right or wrong. It just depends,” one
former Commerce Department official said. “Would you like to just
spend the money and be done with it, and then the industry picks it
up? Or do you want this to become an enduring institution for many
decades?”

The former Commerce official said “almost everyone” at the Commerce
Department who oversaw the NSTC left this year, even before Lutnick’s
announcement cancelling Natcast. They said the department appears to
be consolidating staff to oversee a broader group of
semiconductor-related programs at NIST, such as the NSTC and the
National Advanced Packaging Manufacturing Program. The department also
disbanded the Industrial Advisory Committee, which advised the
department on long-term issues for Natcast, a former IAC member said.
Natcast has laid off most of its staff, keeping a few employees needed
to finish winding down the organization’s activities. Even if NIST
wanted to follow Natcast’s plans, they would need 200 to 300 people,
many with technical expertise, another former Commerce official said.

The Commerce Department and NIST did not respond to requests for
comment.


R&D FACILITIES CANCELED

The NSTC’s three R&D facilities were intended to fill the gap between
small-scale experiments in university labs and R&D in a company’s
manufacturing line, one former Commerce Department official said.

One selected facility, the Albany Nanotech Complex in New York, has
existed since 1997. The Commerce Department and Natcast said they
would initially spend up to $825 million to stand up the Extreme
Ultraviolet Accelerator facility in the complex, which would provide
access to EUV technology with standard numerical aperture capabilities
by 2025 and higher ones by 2026. Higher NA allows for more intricate
printing on a transistor so that more transistors can fit on one chip
wafer, giving each chip greater processing power.  The other two
facilities, a Design and Collaboration Facility in California and an
Advanced Packaging Piloting Facility in Arizona, will not be
built. Natcast had already funded a large team to design the Arizona
facility and will likely face a penalty for canceling prematurely on
the California site, one source closely associated with Natcast said.

The three facility grantees did not respond to requests for
comment. Politico reported that a spokesperson for NY Creates, which
owns the Albany Nanotech Complex, noted that New York state had also
committed $1 billion to expand the complex but did not answer further
questions about how replacement funding would be secured. A
spokesperson for Arizona State University, which would have housed the
Arizona site, told Politico that “the planned facility reflects a
commitment on the scale of a new national laboratory” and “achieving
that national vision depends on federal support.”


THE ORIGINAL VISION FOR NATCAST

The Biden administration envisioned Natcast as a public-private
consortium built to last for multiple decades and pursue long-term
programs to support the U.S.  semiconductor industry. The plan for the
NSTC, as codified in the CHIPS and Science Act, includes research,
workforce training programs, and an investment fund to help startup
companies commercialize new technologies.

Some cited imec, a Belgium-based semiconductor and nanotech research
hub, as an inspiration for Natcast. Imec is a nonprofit with
semiconductor facilities, thousands of employees, and a billion-dollar
annual budget. It began in 1984 as fully government-funded, but as of
2024, it received 75% of its budget from industry.

The CHIPS and Science Act’s mandate for a five-year program with $7 billion
would not be enough on its own to establish U.S. semiconductor leadership,
sources said.

“There was the recognition that, over time, it had to generate enough
value that it would be self-sustaining without government funding,”
said a former member of the Industrial Advisory Committee.

Part of the idea behind creating Natcast as an independent body, they
added, was to maintain focus on longer-term research agendas and keep
the organization “separated from the vagaries of annual government
funding.”  One former Commerce official said the U.S. is missing its
opportunity to create its version of imec.

“Pretty much every major silicon network company participates in the
imec consortium… because that’s where that sort of pre-competitive
research gets done, which is wonderful, except it’s not in the U.S.,”
they said. “There’s been pockets of it, if you look here and there…
but there’s not that sort of scale for open, collaborative research in
this country.”

They also expressed doubt about whether the current plan for the NSTC
would align with the CHIPS and Science Act.

“I think people in government will have to take a look at that, in
terms of, is what’s going on now consistent with the statute,” the
former official said. “I don’t think anyone really knows what’s going
to happen.”


DISPUTING NATCAST’S LEGALITY

In his clawback announcement, Lutnick pointed to the Department of
Justice’s published opinion that Natcast’s creation violates federal
law. The opinion, written in response to a request from the Department
of Commerce, concludes that the creation of Natcast violated the
Government Corporation Control Act by establishing a corporation to
“act as an agency” without being specifically empowered to do so by a
law. The opinion acknowledges that DOJ “suggested informally” to the
Biden administration that the plan for Natcast was in compliance with
the GCCA, but says the legal reasoning behind that advice was flawed.

Because Natcast’s creation violated the GCCA, Lutnick wrote, the
funding agreement between Natcast and the administration “has no legal
force or effect” and “the department will not abide by its terms.”

In particular, Lutnick criticized Natcast’s board of trustees and the
committee that selected the board because some members had previously
held positions within the Biden administration, including in the
Commerce Department or as a member of an independent advisory
committee for the department.

Lutnick also said the funding agreement between the Commerce
Department and Natcast would “tie future administrations’ hands” by
requiring the department to issue payments annually and whenever
Natcast meets certain milestones, and by limiting the department’s
authority to terminate the agreement.

Since Natcast’s founding, members of both the Biden and Trump
administrations had argued that the department did not have enough
control over the nonprofit, one source said. But others overseeing
Natcast believed the department had too much control. One former
member of the board pointed to the Commerce Department having veto
authority over all of Natcast’s programs as an example of excessive
oversight that would have hampered the nonprofit.

“I think people would still be okay with administering the program
differently, with a lighter touch or more direct government
involvement. But what’s happened now is, everyone in industry invested
multiple years of engagement, only to have it go away,” a former
Commerce official said. “So starting from scratch and saying, ‘We’re
going to do something completely different,’ I think a lot of people
are just going to decide not to engage.”


DECEMBER


12/17/25: NYT.  Trump Administration Plans to Break Up Premier Weather
  and Climate Research Center / Russell Vought, the White House budget
  director, called the laboratory a source of “climate alarmism.”

DISMANTLING NCAR 

The Trump administration said it will be dismantling the National Center
for Atmospheric Research in Colorado, one of the world’s leading Earth
science research institutions.

The center, founded in 1960, is responsible for many of the biggest
scientific advances in humanity’s understanding of weather and
climate.  Its research aircraft and sophisticated computer models
of the Earth’s atmosphere and oceans are widely used in forecasting
weather events and disasters around the country, and its scientists
study a broad range of topics, including air pollution, ocean currents
and global warming.

But in a social media post announcing the move, Russell Vought, the
director of the Office of Management and Budget, called the center
“one of the largest sources of climate alarmism in the country” and
said that the federal government would be “breaking up” the
institution.

Mr. Vought wrote that a “comprehensive review is underway” and that “any
vital activities such as weather research will be moved to another
entity or location.”

USA Today first reported on the White House plans.

Scientists, meteorologists and lawmakers said the move was an attack on
critical scientific research and would harm the United States.

The National Center for Atmospheric Research was originally founded to
provide scientists studying Earth’s atmosphere with cutting-edge
resources, such as supercomputers, that individual universities could
not afford on their own. It is now widely considered a global leader
in both weather and climate change research, with programs aimed at
tracking severe weather events, modeling floods and understanding how
solar activity affects the Earth’s atmosphere.

For decades, the center has operated with the freedom to develop
outside-the-box ideas that have advanced weather forecasting. Its
researchers identified atmospheric patterns that meteorologists rely on
today to predict the weather.

In the 1970s, the NCAR scientists Roland Madden and Paul Julian
discovered a “pulse” of clouds and rain that circles the Equator every
30 to 90 days. This phenomenon, now known as the Madden–Julian
oscillation fundamentally changed the field, helping forecasters
predict weather patterns weeks to months in advance.

NCAR scientists also developed GPS dropsondes, instruments that are
dropped from aircraft to gather crucial data about a cyclone’s
strength and center. This data became pivotal for the computer models
used to predict hurricane paths today.

The center’s research has often proved useful in unexpected places,
such as when its studies of downdrafts in the lower atmosphere in the
1970s and 1980s led to development of wind shear detection systems
around airports that helped address the cause of hundreds of aviation
accidents during that era.  Those systems still protect airplanes
today.

The lab is operated by the University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research, a nonprofit consortium of more than 100 universities, but the
vast majority of its funding comes from the federal government,
including through hundreds of millions of dollars in grants from the
National Science Foundation.

Scientists said dismantling the center’s climate research would do
irreparable damage to cutting-edge meteorology and advances in weather
forecasting.

“It’s the beating heart of our field,” Kim Cobb, a climate scientist
and the director of the Institute at Brown for Environment and
Society, wrote in a post on Bluesky “Generations of scientists have
trained there, and almost everyone I know relies on deep
collaborations with NCAR scientists.”

Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech University, wrote
on X that the institution is “quite literally our global mother ship.”
She said nearly everyone who researches climate and weather around the
world has worked at or with NCAR.

It “supports the scientists who fly into hurricanes, the meteorologists
who develop new radar technology, the physicists who envision and code
new weather models, and yes — the largest community climate model in the
world,” she wrote, adding, “Dismantling NCAR is like taking a
sledgehammer to the keystone holding up our scientific understanding of
the planet.”

Mr. Trump routinely mocks climate change as a hoax and his
administration has labeled virtually all efforts to study climate
change, reduce the level of dangerous greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
or protect communities from the impacts of global warming as “alarmism.”

The administration said the center had supported what it called
frivolous and ideological issues, such as research on how to protect
wind turbines from hurricanes and a project to incorporate Indigenous
knowledge into studies of how climate change would affect coastal
communities.

Yet experts said much of the center’s activities focused on basic
atmospheric science that had little to do with political debates over
climate change.

“If you asked me where you’d find the most politicized elements of
climate research, NCAR would be way down that list,” said Roger Pielke
Jr., a political scientist at the conservative American Enterprise
Institute who has often criticized climate researchers elsewhere for
engaging in activism.

“A lot of what NCAR does is atmospheric science beyond climate change,
like improving short-term weather forecasts,” added Dr. Pielke, who
worked at the center early in his career. “Destroying it makes no sense.”

Putting the facility on the chopping block would also be an economic
blow to Colorado. President Trump has feuded with Gov. Jared Polis, a
Democrat, in recent days, calling him a “weak and pathetic man” and
accusing the governor with no evidence of being “run” by Venezuelan gang
members.

The dispute stems from the case of a former state election official in
Colorado, Tina Peters, who was convicted of multiple felonies after
she gave Mr. Trump’s supporters unauthorized access to voting machines
after the 2020 presidential election. Mr. Trump has pardoned
Ms. Peters, but Colorado officials have countered that presidential
pardons do not apply to state crimes.

A senior White House official, who declined to be identified, said in
response to the announcement that Colorado constituents would be better
served if Governor Polis wanted to work with the president.

Governor Polis said in a statement that the federal government had yet
to inform the state of its plans. “If true, public safety is at risk and
science is being attacked,” he said.

“Climate change is real, but the work of NCAR goes far beyond climate
science,” the governor said. “NCAR delivers data around severe weather
events like fires and floods that help our country save lives and
property, and prevent devastation for families. If these cuts move
forward, we will lose our competitive advantage against foreign powers
and adversaries in the pursuit of scientific discovery.”

On Wednesday afternoon, the facility’s headquarters on a mesa above
Boulder were locked and empty, closed because of a ferocious windstorm
that had created critical wildfire danger after weeks of near-record
high temperatures and almost no snow.

“This hits so close to home, and on a day when we have summer clothes on
when we should have snow,” Christine Cowles, 61, said as she and a few
friends hiked through the brittle grass leading up to the facility’s
entrance sign and made plans to protest the White House’s proposal.

To Ms. Cowles, the fact that Boulder was bracing for a potential
wildfire on a 66-degree December day demonstrated the importance of
NCAR’s research on climate change in a hotter, drier West. In December
2021, she watched the Marshall fire sweep through a suburban
neighborhood near her home, destroying 1,000 structures and killing two
people. She said the danger would only get worse if the administration
gutted efforts to track and understand climate change.

Others visitors hiking up to the trailhead that sits beside the
facility’s pink headquarters, designed by I.M. Pei, called the closure
announcement a political attack against a Democratic state that briefly
kicked Mr. Trump off the ballot, has opposed his immigration crackdown
and refused to free one of his high-profile political allies from prison.

“It’s a blatant attack,” Jennifer Roos, 57, a retired software engineer,
said. “They’re going after blue states.”

Mayor Aaron Brockett of Boulder called the facility an economic and
scientific cornerstone in the university town. He said that dismantling
it would erase hundreds of good-paying jobs and could also hurt research
firms and other businesses that are based in Boulder to be close to
scientific agencies like NCAR.

“The ripple effects would be significant,” he said. “You’d have those
iconic buildings empty. It would have a very strong negative impact on
the Boulder community.”

In New Orleans, where many of the world’s top Earth science researchers
are gathered for an annual meeting, Antonio Busalacchi, president of the
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, which operates the
center, said, “What we are seeing is the administration canceling the
freedom of scientific thought and inquiry.”


Comments...

The Republican Party, not just Trump but the Republican Party as a
whole, are imposing upon America a version of Mao's cultural
revolution.  The party and its elite are all that matters. Science and
knowledge that conflicts with their current agenda is
suppressed. Ignorance that aligns with it is supported.  They are
dragging America, and Americans, backwards and downwards. China must
be thanking its lucky stars that the Republicans are in control of
their primary opponent on the world stage.

I find it impossible to understand why our government is destroying
the country.

Ah yes….another one of our “best in class” U.S. institutions to be
destroyed by 45-47.  The country is going to look like west L.A. after
the Palisades Fire when DJT is finished with us.

Somewhere in the bowels of Congress is the authorization for NSF
funding of this and other programs. If only Congress were protecting
its prerogative to control how taxpayer funds are spent.

As someone who studied this field in college and is passionate about
weather/climate science, this is incredibly sad to see. I certainly
hope it does not come to pass, but after the moves this administration
has made, I am not hopeful.  Another move in a string of short-sighted
decisions that will set us back for decades.

Why am I paying taxes? Oh that’s right, they will cut my taxes so I
can pay a private equity firm an exorbitant fee for a weather
report. Can you imagine running any kind of business that relies on
consistent weather reports? What a nightmare

This is what authoritarian regimes do…eliminate all information,
facts, and resistance to their agenda.  When will America stop sleep
walking and take action to fix the crony capitalism corruption
stealing from us all and especially our future?

At some point the several states will have to start funding vital
scientific research without the help of the Federal Government It's
clear that facts and the truth do not matter to this administration if
facts and the truth do not line up with the official rhetoric.  Of
course once funding for scientific research, healthcare, education
etc. is assumed by the states it begs the question Why are we sending
any money to Washington in the first place? Maybe it's time to defund
the government.

I hate everything that is happening in our country.  It is going to
take decades to come out from this heinousness.

OMB Director Vought went on to say "Climate Change was not an issue
during the Stone Age so that's where we're heading."

@Dan Dan, I will help you.  This is all about Trump taking money from
the fossil fuel industry.  If there is no data about climate change,
then there is no concern about it.  He said this during COVID - if
there is no testing, then no one has COVID.  He has been bought and
paid for by ExxonMobil, Chevron, and ConocoPhillips.  I wouldn't doubt
that Gazprom in Russia is also paying Trump, which probably in part
explains his closeness to Putin.  Follow the money.

This ideologically driven attack on reason and scientific inquiry
should have been the lead story today. The Trump administration is
creating irreparable harm with actions such as this. We are in very
dark times.

There is a bizarre irony in that today in Boulder, Colorado, where
NCAR (The National Center for Atmospheric Research) perches above our
beautiful valley keeping us preparation ready for dangerous weather
events, is experiencing cyclone level winds-schools closed,
electricity shut down, community asked not to drive- the news comes
out this premiere weather and climate scientific service will be
dismantled. NO!

This administration (mainly under the instigation of Russell Vought)
is in the process of dismantling all of the meteorological
institutions in this country that have made the US a leader in this
field until now. Tellingly, this was one of the main goals in Project
2025 (architect: Russell Vought) aimed at boosting climate denial and
supporting fossil fuel use (and the associated corporations). They
have defunded NOAA, etc. These actions will likely lead to
catastrophic harm in the farming industry and the population at
large. Where is Congress (the Republican Party!!) in these insane
decisions?

The Trump administration’s move to dismantle the National Center for
Atmospheric Research is not an isolated budget cut; it is part of a
broader war on science that harms everyone. NCAR’s work underpins
weather forecasting, disaster preparedness, agriculture, aviation, and
public-health planning. Weakening it does not enhance security — it
leaves the country blind.  This attack on evidence comes as the
administration opens the Arctic to expanded oil and gas drilling,
dismantles clean energy, and rolls back environmental and
public-health protections. You cannot discard climate science while
claiming to manage climate risk.

    [cont] Climate models are not abstract. They inform hospital surge
    planning by predicting when and where extreme heat, wildfire
    smoke, floods, and storms will occur — the conditions that drive
    spikes in ER visits, respiratory failure, cardiac events, trauma,
    and infectious disease. Health systems use these projections to
    plan staffing, bed capacity, cooling and power backup, supply
    chains, and evacuation protocols. Without them, hospitals are
    forced into reactive crisis care.  At the same time, the
    administration is defunding university research and installing RFK
    Jr. to dismantle public-health institutions from within. Calling
    this “national security” does not make it so. Real security comes
    from evidence, foresight, and preparedness — not from erasing
    inconvenient facts and hollowing out the institutions that save
    lives.

So I read years ago (I don’t know where) about how there was a
movement to privatize the national weather service and
forecasting. Also doing a quick google search on it comes up with
results on project 2025 stating just that. This is certainly looks
like a step in that direction. It seems the people will still be
paying taxes, but getting a lot less out of it.

Additional context for this article: I believe the administration has
also tried to zero out two other federally-funded Earth modeling
centers at NOAA in Princeton and at DOE.  Not sure what the status of
those efforts is.

Direct from Project 2025 the plan the Trump and his Administration
swore they were not going to implement.  “Downsize the Office of
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research. OAR provides theoretical science, as
opposed to the applied science of the National Hurricane Center. OAR
is, however, the source of much of NOAA’s climate alarmism. The
preponderance of its climate-change research should be disbanded.”.
Historians will comment on the stupidity of this Administration after
lives are lost, property destroyed and scientific progress is set back
for generations.  When will this country and Congress wake up!

I’m sorry— who elected this bureaucrat, Russell Vought?  What he is
doing, ignoring Congressional funding appropriations, is illegal.  He
needs to be in prison, not destroying our ability to monitor and
respond to climate change.

Putin will never stop laughing about how easy it was to get Americans
to destroy themselves from the inside.

If we survive this presidency, one lesson I hope people carry away
from this experience is just how fragile our government and its
institutions really are.  One man, with the help of a number of groups
like the Heritage Foundation have levied an assault on this country
and the damage done may never be reversed.

There is no end to what the mentally ill sociopath and his enablers
will do to further enrich billionaires and big fossil companies. The
embodiment of ignorance.  I'm retired, but have degrees in geology and
applied physics. I can assure the 94% of US citizens who have no
traditional science degree that global warming and climate change is
real. As backed by decades of research and data.  And we've barely
begun to see the negative impacts: more frequent and intense storms,
heat waves, forest fires, coastal erosion and flooding, rising sea
level, fresh water and agricultural impacts. ecosystem destruction,
etc. etc.  The fact trump calls it all a hoax and most republicans
agree and do nothing tells educated, rational people all you need to
know about their ignorance and arrogance, and greed at any cost.  And
of course we and airlines all need accurate weather forecasting for
our safety and survival.  How half the voting country can just shrug
at this destruction of our science and research infrastructure and
believe the ignorant lies of trump and republicans .... just defies
comprehension.  Trump is the biggest threat to our nation and world
we've seen in our lifetimes. Hope we can impeach him and vote all his
supporters out. We have to try.

Dogma over science. One giant leap back to Middle Age mentality. This
administration is single handedly setting the US excellence in science
back by decades. China moves ahead as we move backwards in science,
technology, innovation and research. Darwin wept.

Russell Vought and Steven Miller are so driven by what to my mind is
an unfathomable ideology, that to call it conservative or even right
wing would be to describe it in a way that might lend it credibility.
That it is destructive, cruel and void of anything other than a
callous disregard for US Citizens let alone the rest of the world is
the only thing that can be said about it.  If they sleep at night -
and they probably sleep soundly - they certainly keep others up
wondering what calamitous stupidity they will get up to next.

This is so grotesque a denial of science, truth, respect for
excellence and expertise. respect for decency, respect for our
Re[ublic that it's beyond the pale.  Oh, wait, so sorry. I wrote this
same comment about something that Trump did yesterday.  Oops, I also
wrote it about something that happened w Trump the day before
yesterday.  I apologize. I'm losing it. I think I wrote this same
comment about something that happened w Trump three days ago...and
four days ago as well...and I'm sure I've written it, or thought it,
since he was inaugurated.  Is there a way to just put this comment
from me on daily repeat?

The research, models, data, and everything else needs to quickly
backed up someplace that is beyond the reach of the Trump
administration before they start destroying it.  At some point sanity
will reappear but it could be years away.  I'd suggest a university
outside the US would be the safest repository, along with key staff if
possible.

"Russell Vought, the director of the Office of Management and Budget,
called the center “one of the largest sources of climate alarmism in
the country” and said that the federal government would be “breaking
up” the institution.  When Trump and his acolytes an enablers are
history we need to find Vought and make him stand before the American
people to answer for the radical, reactionary and vengeful policies of
this Administration. He's the wellhead of ideas that have ruined
thousands of lives and will leave American climate technology eating
the dust of China and other countries with rational
governments. Vought is a vengeful little man on a mission to re-make
America into a bizarre notion of "greatness"

Trump can dismantle agencies forever but it won’t change the facts of
climate change. During this administration we are starting to fall
behind other countries in research and sciences to the detriment of
our society and economy. Time to wake up America.

When do they start to raid the universities and toss the professors
from the windows like 1936 Germany.

The hiring surge by the next democratic administration is going to be
one of the biggest job booms in history.

Trump's Chief of Staff referred to Russell Vought as a "right wing
zealot" in the interviews she did with Vanity Fair. And you know if
that is her description of Vought, he is much worse than that.  I've
read a lot of articles about Vought. He is a hard right wing white
Christian Nationalist, and a member of the Heritage Society, a group
that is certainly NOT your average conservative. This is a group of
hard right zealots who are obsessed with anti-government sentiment and
nihilist views. Vought was one of the co-authors of Project 2025: a
fringe, hard right,autocratic manifesto (and I'm being polite about my
description.). 

    [cont] Vought along with his main lawyer Mark Paoletta are
    responsible for all the illegal claw backs and withholding of
    prior appropriated funds authorized by Congress. Vought worked
    closely with DOGE/Musk to unjustly and frankly often stupidly fire
    so many experienced federal workers. Vought helped to dismantle
    the U.S. State Dept., it's diplomatic core and U.S. AID, a
    critical tool for U.S. international relations.  Vought is an
    ignorant hard core climate change denier. He has zero respect for
    peer reviewed, ethical science. During a time of increasing
    severity & numbers of super storms, flooding, wildfires would you
    decimate the U.S. Weather & Climate Change Research Center?
    Weather prediction saves lives. Vought is a zealot who is doubling
    down on stupid & he must be stopped.

This is what happens when ignorant and uneducated men run the
country. Xi Jinping is a chemical engineer. Is it any wonder that
China is miles ahead of us in renewable energy powering Chinese AI
good and cheap enough to be used by Airbnb?  Science deniers lose in
the 21st century.

Russell Vought of course is one of the chief threats to this country,
not NOAA. This is more blue state warfare and denial of an existential
threat that human societies have caused, and idiot savants like Vought
will make worse to pursue his 'far-right zealotry' (Susie Wiles'
words, not mine).

Every day another horrifying report of the follies of Trump, actually
of Vought, who seems to be a strange, obsessive personality, consumed
by resentments. When the Times interviewed him, he claimed to have
been influenced by seeing the terrible burden of taxation on his
parents that prevented them from accomplishing great things. The
reality was that his mother was a public school teacher, thus a
government employee, and as a widow with two children presumably
received Social Security payments. His father was a union electrician,
probably well paid, and a veteran, thus eligible for various
government benefits, including a VA mortgage. When they combined his
four sons with her two daughters and had Russell, they created a
burden of seven children who were also tax deductions, so the nature
of the government tax burden is not at all clear. At some point the
parents became religious zealots and sent Russell to the religious and
very conservative Wheaton College, which probably encouraged his
disdain for science, and now Trump has turned him loose to destroy
much of the government funded research that would be a source of pride
to a normal president.

How does a nation of 341 million people—with instant access to the
world’s knowledge—allow a middling, extremist right-wing bureaucrat
and a handful of unqualified loyalists to dismantle eight decades of
the post-war order and begin erasing a century of American leadership
in science, medicine, and technology?  This is not just political
failure but institutional collapse. Systems built over
generations—public health, biomedical research, climate science,
universities, and alliances—are being hollowed out by people who
neither understand how they work nor respect evidence. Expertise is
dismissed as elitism, data as ideology, and uncertainty as
fraud. History is clear: nations that abandon evidence-based
governance dismantle the foundations of their own prosperity and
security.  We have 3 more years to go. We will not survive this.

It’s a very dry 66 degrees in late December [in Denver], with
projected 60-80 MPH winds. For those not accustomed to these
conditions, it’s terrifying. Firefighters can do nothing to stop a
fire in this situation. The same agency warning us about these events
is under threat from a mob boss wannabe president. Home insurance has
skyrocketed due to weather events. Just another financial pain point
the incompetent and corrupt Trump administration will make drastically
worse.

Everything is upside down and backwards in this administration. I am
afraid that we can't survive another three years of this attack on our
environment, our democracy and the rule of law. Another day, another
piece of bad news from the far right.

First the NIH, the CDC, NREL, now NCAR...... Our national scientific
enterprise - built over decades and with tens of billions of dollars
of taxpayer investment - is being completely dismantled. Why? Because
science and facts that conflict with Republicanism is "inconvenient."
When your party is composed of either the ignorant, or those who can
profit from the ignorance of others, this is the natural course of
events.

NCAR has been around since 1960. Fifty-five years of excellence. It is
a stellar scientific institution.  So of course Trump and his henchman
Vought want to dismantle it.  Are there really that many stupid people
in this country, who still support this imposter of a president?
Meanwhile, here in the Rockies, we continue to experience record
drought and warming temperatures. It’s December 17, and it hit 70
degrees today, it is forecast to remain unseasonably warm, with not a
drop of rain or flake of snow in sight.  Insanity.

They are destroying the very things that make our country great - the
institutions that represent pinnacles of human understanding - because
with understanding comes awareness of the fact that they are stealing
this country from its electorate. The MO is Fascist
through-and-through. The Vought-Miller gang is as sinister as it is
smart.

"“If you asked me where you’d find the most politicized elements of
climate research, NCAR would be way down that list,” said Roger Pielke
Jr., a political scientist at the conservative American Enterprise
Institute ..."  As someone who has collaborated with numerous NCAR
scientists over the years, this statement rings true. NCAR has done
more to establish the scientific basis of climate and environmental
science than any other institution on the planet. This is exactly why
the Trump administration and its backers want to destroy it.  This is
a truly devastating day for science and our society. Without NCAR, we
will be flying blind as we try to navigate our rapidly changing
environment. Rather than confront the truth, our government has chosen
to kill the messenger.

Mother Nature doesn't care. The climate crisis will proceed apace.

This administration (mainly under the instigation of Russell Vought)
is in the process of dismantling all of the meteorological
institutions in this country that have made the US a leader in this
field until now. Tellingly, this was one of the main goals in Project
2025 (architect: Russell Vought) aimed at boosting climate denial and
supporting fossil fuel use (and the associated corporations). They
have defunded NOAA, etc. These actions will likely lead to
catastrophic harm in the farming industry and the population at
large. Where is Congress (the Republican Party!!) in these insane
decisions?


12/19/25: NYT. A Somber Mood at Science Meeting as Trump Budget Cuts
  Continue / News of the breakup of a leading science institution
  [NCAR] rippled through an annual gathering of Earth, ocean and space
  scientists. Many say American science is suffering under the Trump
  administration.

American science is wobbling right now.  After cuts to federal funding
and the firing or early retirement of thousands of government
scientists this year, another blow to scientific research landed this
week. The Trump administration on Tuesday night announced a plan to
dismantle the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder,
Colo., one of the world’s premier climate and weather science
institutions.

News of the planned closure rippled through the annual gathering of
the American Geophysical Union, an organization of Earth and space
scientists, being held this week in New Orleans.

“You could feel the energy in the room, and it was very sad,” said
Mohammed Shehzaib Ali, a graduate student at North Carolina State
University who uses NCAR’s supercomputer to run programs to understand
how weather patterns affect air pollution from wildfires. “Atmospheric
science is built on collaboration, and NCAR is the pathway through
which we collaborate,” Mr. Shehzaib Ali said.

The center’s 830 employees conduct research on weather, climate and
energy systems, and operate supercomputers that are used by thousands
of scientists across the globe. In his announcement, Russell Vought,
the director of the Office of Management and Budget, called NCAR “one
of the largest sources of climate alarmism in the country.”

Antonio Busalacchi Jr., president of the University Corporation for
Atmospheric Research, which manages NCAR, told reporters on Thursday
that the center’s research had led to technological advances in
aviation, hurricane prediction and space weather. It has also
collaborated with the insurance industry to better predict risk from
extreme weather.

“We are talking about a significant impact on the scientific
enterprise in this country,” Dr. Busalacchi said. Closing the center
would be “setting back science in this country by decades.”

...The NCAR announcement was the latest cut to science from the Trump
administration.  President Trump routinely mocks climate change as a
hoax, and his administration has labeled virtually all efforts to
study climate change, reduce the level of dangerous greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere or protect communities from the impacts of global
warming as “alarmism.”

Brandon Jones, the president of the American Geophysical Union, said
the Trump administration had removed data from federal websites,
frozen or canceled grants for climate research and weakened
regulations designed to protect public health and the environment.

“What we’ve experienced this past year is not an abstract policy
disagreement,” Dr. Jones said. “It’s a fundamental disruption of the
systems that allow science in this country to function.”

This year’s event was smaller than in previous years. Conference
attendance was down by one third to 20,000 from 30,000 last year.
Federal science agencies and universities sent fewer recruiters for
both jobs and academic positions. Those who did attend said they were
struggling to keep their research projects running and money flowing
to support graduate students who represented the future of American
science.

We’ve tried to use as much money as we can before it got taken away,”
said Robert Pockalny, associate dean for academic affairs at the
University of Rhode Island Graduate School of Oceanography. The school
has admitted 22 graduate students each of the past three years. That
number dropped to 10 students this year, mostly because of uncertainty
about federal funding for ocean science.

“What we tell our students is, the writing was on the wall about these
jobs, but the skills you’re learning are transferable,” Dr. Pockalny
said. Even if they are no longer studying the ocean, he said, the
things that they are learning “can be applied to business, industry,
banking and all sorts of data analysis.”

To maintain federal grants, some universities are switching from
researching how to slow climate change to studying how to limit its
effects... “There’s an increasing appetite for adaptation as opposed
to mitigation.”

But for midcareer researchers, technicians and scientists working in
the middle of ambitious projects, switching gears isn’t an option.

In 2009, the National Science Foundation allocated $386 million to
build the Ocean Observatories Initiative, strings of stationary buoys
and moored instruments in four locations around the United
States....The observatories were completed in 2016, but the Trump
administration has slashed the $40 million each year needed to keep
the 900 scientific instruments running, according to James Edson, a
leader of the project and a senior scientist at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution.

“Things are starting to break,” Dr. Edson said about some of the
devices.


               --- ENDD NCAR DISMANTLE ---


12/19/25: Inside Higher Education.  The Year That Changed Research / A
  year of mass federal grant terminations and sweeping policy changes
  to the nation’s research enterprise broke many scientists’ trust in
  the government. And those changes offer insight into what may come
  next year.

Ask just about any federally funded researcher to describe 2025, and
they use words like chaotic, demoralizing, confusing, destabilizing and
transformational.

“It’s been a very destabilizing year [that’s made] people question the
nation’s commitment to research,” Heather Pierce, senior director for
science policy at the Association of American Medical Colleges, told
/Inside Higher Ed/.

She expects 2026 to be a year of rebuilding and standard setting.

Speaking of the National Institutes of Health, which calls itself the
world’s largest public biomedical research funder, Pierce said the
research community is expecting more major regulation and written policy
changes in 2026, which will shed more light on how grants will be
funded, how much the federal government will invest in the research
enterprise and what priorities will emerge from this administration.

If the administration’s attacks on federally funded research in 2025 are
any indication, the federal government of 2026 will likely be just as
willing to advance its conservative ideological agenda by controlling
universities through the nation’s research enterprise. And while the
administration may not let up in the new year, courts stymied some of
its most sweeping changes in 2025 and may continue to be an obstacle in
the new year.

Soon after President Donald Trump started his second term in January,
the National Institutes of Health, National Science Foundation,
Department of Education and numerous other federal agencies that
collectively send billions in research dollars to universities, began
freezing and terminating hundreds of grants. Many of the targeted
grants—including projects focused on vaccines, climate change, and
health and education disparities among women, LGBTQ+ and minority
communities—were caught in the crossfire of Trump’s war against
diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives and so-called woke gender
ideology.

Not only would the terminations lead to the loss of jobs, staff and
income, a lawsuit filed by a group of NIH-funded researchers
in April predicted that “scientific advancement will be delayed,
treatments will go undiscovered, human health will be compromised, and
lives will be lost.”

    The true damage comes from the betrayal, the sense of uncertainty
    and the loss of trust researchers have—or had—vis-à-vis with the
    federal government. That’s really hard to quantify.”

    Scott Delaney, cofounder of Grant Witness

Terminated federal grants encompassed a wide range of research
projects. Some of the casualties included funding to study the erosion
of democracy, the effectiveness of work study, dementia, COVID-19,
cancer and misinformation. Others supported teacher-training programs
and initiatives designed to attract more underrepresented students
into STEM fields.

“The premise of this award is incompatible with agency priorities,”
read a letter the NIH sent to numerous researchers back in March,
terminating their active grants. “[R]esearch programs based primarily
on artificial and nonscientific categories, including amorphous equity
objectives, are antithetical to the scientific inquiry, do nothing to
expand our knowledge of living systems, provide low returns on
investment, and ultimately do not enhance health, lengthen life, or
reduce illness.”

But it didn’t stop there.

The Trump administration also temporarily froze billions more dollars
in federal research grants at a handful of the nation’s wealthiest,
most selective institutions, including Harvard University, Columbia
University and the University of California at Los Angeles, for
allegedly failing to address antisemitism on campus and ignoring the
Supreme Court’s ban on affirmative action, among other
allegations. (Most of the universities got their money back after
cutting deals with the administration or via court orders.)

And because the NIH, NSF, ED and several other federal agencies also
laid off thousands of workers, researchers with questions had far
fewer resources to help them navigate changes to application and award
processes.

By some estimates, the government disrupted upward of $17 billion in NIH
grants alone this year, according to Scott Delaney, a former lawyer and
Harvard University epidemiologist who the university laid off as a
result of grant terminations.

Earlier this year, he cofounded Grant Witness, a website that has been
tracking grant cancellations at the NIH, NSF and the Environmental
Protection Agency.  While both the NIH and NSF have since restored
thousands of grants, Delaney said those and other restorations won’t
be enough to repair the now-fractured relationship between faculty and
federal funding agencies.

“The true damage comes from the betrayal, the sense of uncertainty and
the loss of trust researchers have—or had—vis-à-vis with the federal
government. That’s really hard to quantify,” he told /Inside Higher
Ed/ this month. “In the years ahead, there will be folks who don’t
want to plan long-term research projects because they don’t know if
their funds are going to get summarily yanked out from underneath
them; folks who don’t want to continue their careers in academic
research or train in academic research; trainees who would have had
training grant support who don’t now and go do something else. And
some researchers will just leave the country."

In addition, some of the Trump administration’s research funding
proposals have stoked worry this year about the long-term sustainability
of the nation’s academic research enterprise.

Numerous agencies—including NIH, NSF and Department of Energy—have
attempted to cut university reimbursement rates for indirect research
costs. Higher education and science advocates characterized such
policies as “shortsighted and dangerous,” and said it would hamper
university budgets, hurt the economy and stymie scientific
progress. Although federal courts have since blocked the rate caps,
the mere anticipation of such policy changes led some
universities—including the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Northwestern University—to freeze hiring and, in some cases, graduate
admissions.

But by September, the NIH said it was on track to spend its full $47
billion budget by the end of the fiscal year that month.

However, the NIH awarded 3,500 fewer competitive grants this year with
the biggest declines at the Institutes of minority health, nursing,
human genome, alcohol abuse and alcoholism and mental health,
according to /The New York Times/. Those changes are part of the White
House’s plan to streamline scientific funding by eliminating wasteful
spending and cutting “woke programs" that “poison the minds of
Americans."

As 2025 fades into 2026, the federal research funding picture isn’t
looking as bleak—at least not on the surface.

A flurry of litigation from universities, individual researchers, trade
associations and labor unions prompted several federal agencies to
reinstate some research grants.

All things considered, 2025 “could have been worse, but it was still
awful,” Delaney said, noting that there are still thousands of grants in
limbo at the NSF, DOE and numerous other agencies beyond the NIH.

“So many people fought so hard—some of them sacrificed their jobs inside
these federal agencies—and they succeeded in many ways. To tell a story
that doesn’t include both their sacrifice and their success discredits
what was a Herculean and heroic effort for scientists, many who have
never spoken up in a political way before this year,” he added. “But
it’s also important to emphasize that this fight isn’t over, and we need
to keep fighting. It can get worse.”


    ‘Not Insulated From Politics’

Katie Edwards, a social work professor at the University of Michigan, is
one of the researchers who sued the NIH. In March, the agency canceled
six grants she was using to research mental health and violence
prevention among marginalized young people, including Indigenous and
LGBTQ+ youth. Valued at $10 million, the grants supported roughly 50
staff, community collaborators and trainees and put them all at risk of
losing their jobs.

“For many trainees—especially those who are LGBTQ+ or people of
color—the message they internalized was painful: that research on their
communities is ‘ideological’ or expendable,” Edwards wrote in an email
to /Inside Higher Ed/. “The emotional toll of fighting for and
protecting staff, reassuring community partners, and trying to navigate
a constantly shifting federal landscape has been immense.”


        Fighting for Public Health Research

   *April:* A group of NIH researchers, a public health advocacy
   organization and a union representing more than 120,000 higher
   education workers sued the NIH for terminating more than $2.4
   billion in grants.

   *June:* A federal judge ordered the agency to reinstate the grants
   immediately and said the government’s actions amounted to a policy
   of “racial discrimination” guided by “homogeneity, inequity and
   exclusion.”

   *August:* The U.S. Supreme Court ruled by a vote of 5 to 4 that any
   legal challenges to the grant terminations should be litigated in
   the Court of Federal Claims, not the federal district court system
   they’ve been moving through for months.


Although her grants have since been reinstated—albeit some with reduced
dollar amounts, administrative delays and anti-DEI language in the
notice of award—and her team has resumed their work, this year has
forever changed her perspective on research.

“This year made clear that science is not insulated from politics—and
that researchers must be prepared to defend not only their projects, but
the people those projects exist to serve,” Edwards said. “Federally
funded research with marginalized communities requires constant
vigilance, strong partnerships, and collective resistance. We cannot
simply adjust our science to political winds when real communities rely
on this work.”

But not every researcher who appealed a grant termination got their
money back.

In March, the Education Department informed Judith Scott-Clayton, a
professor of economics and education at Teachers College, Columbia
University, that it was cancelling her six-year grant to examine the
impact of receiving federal work-study funding on enrollment and
persistence among low-income students four and a half years into the grant.

Teachers College appealed the decision in April, but the government
rejected it in September, stating that Education Department grants were
specifically excluded from Columbia University’s settlement with the
Trump administration. Support from a private foundation allowed
Scott-Clayton and her team to resume their research this November, but
she told /Inside Higher Ed/ that the disruptions to research have been
“extremely unsettling and demoralizing.”

And she’s not certain that 2026 will be any better.

“Even though I believe in the value of what I do, self-doubt can flare
up when an authority as significant as the federal government formally
declares your work to be a waste of resources,” she said. “I am not sure
what the future of our field looks like if our federal government no
longer values research evidence. And I am not sure what our society
looks like if the federal government can make decisions so arbitrarily
without any consequences or constraints.”


    New Year, Old Concerns

This year is ending with unresolved questions about what the Trump
administration’s research policies will ultimately be, and how much the
federal government will fund research. Pierce at the Association of
American Medical Colleges said she expects next year will provide answers.

Joanne Padrón Carney, chief government relations officer for the
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), said “I
think the [the Energy Department’s] Genesis mission and the
prioritization of artificial intelligence and emerging technologies is
going to be a key driver in — I guess you could say — filling in the cracks
of the foundation of the research enterprise that has been kind of hit
by this earthquake in the past year.”

The continuing resolution that ended the historically long federal
government shutdown in November expires Jan. 30, and Congress is leaving
town for the holidays without passing funding bills for some major
science funding agencies, including the NIH, NSF and Energy.

Trump proposed slashing about $5.2 billion from the NSF. But House
appropriators have suggested cutting $2.1 billion, while senators only
put forth axing $60 million, according to an appropriations debate
tracker from the AAAS. And while the president proposed cutting nearly
40 percent from the NIH—$18.1 billion—the House and Senate have
instead suggested increasing its funding by roughly $1 billion, the
tracker shows. That pushback from Congress is promising, advocates
say.

And colleges and universities are still waiting for federal research
funding agencies to set indirect cost reimbursement caps, after
litigation blocked their plans to set the limit at 15 percent. The
forthcoming OMB guidance setting those caps is also supposed to help
agencies implement Trump’s controversial August executive order
directing “senior appointees” to take charge of awarding, denying,
reviewing and terminating new and already awarded grants. Among other
changes, that order also said grants can’t “promote” racial
preferences or “the notion that sex is a chosen or mutable
characteristic,” and that they “should be given to a broad range of
recipients rather than to a select group of repeat players."

Further, the NIH is eyeing ways to reduce how much of its grant
dollars researchers can use to pay scientific journals to publish
their work. The proposed options ranged from limiting how much could
be spent per publication or capping the percentage of a grant that can
go toward publishing fees overall, to no longer funding publication
costs whatsoever. The NIH said in the summer that it planned to make
whatever policy it chose effective early next year, but it only
recently released the public comments, and an agency spokesperson said
he couldn’t provide a definitive implementation timeline.

Just this week, /Science /published a memo showing that NSF is scaling
back its reviews of grant proposals, citing its “significantly
reduced” workforce and a need to expedite approvals and denials to
address a “significant backlog of unreviewed proposals and canceled
review panels” from the government shutdown. The memo also said NSF
program officers are “expected to maximize their use of available
automated merit review tools, especially tools that identify proposals
that should be returned without review.”

And the NIH ordered staff last Friday to start using a “computational
text analysis tool” to scan current and new grants for words and phrases
that may mean they’re misaligned with NIH priorities. Staff were told to
look out for terms such as “health equity” and “structural racism.” How
this and the NSF policy changes will work in practice remains to be seen.

The educational improvement research field also awaits word on the
future of the congressionally required Institute of Education Sciences
(IES), which the administration gutted early this year amid its
ongoing push to dismantle the larger Education Department. IES is the
federal government’s central education data collection and research
funding agency. Education secretary Linda McMahon hired a special
adviser to “re-envision it, but the plan hasn’t been released.

Overall, Pierce said 2026 “will continue to be a challenging year,
especially for those researchers, institutions and trainees that have
seen their grants terminated.” But she noted medical research is marked
by passion for improving the nation’s health.

“It’s an incredibly resilient field,” she said.



12/24/25: 

From aas@aas.org Wed Dec 24 10:15:47 2025
From: American Astronomical Society <aas@aas.org>
Subject: 2025: An Amazing Year

A message from AAS CEO Kevin Marvel highlighting key moments of 2025
and wishing members a happy holiday season.

2025: An Amazing and Tumultuous Year for the Society

2025 will go down in history as one of the most successful yet
stressful years for the Society, including substantial changes coming
in the near future. It has been a truly incredible year, and I want to
thank our volunteer leaders, our members, our authors, and especially
the AAS staff for achieving great things in challenging times. Your
dedication to the AAS is what has kept me engaged and working to
achieve the goals set by our Board of Trustees.

To start off, AAS 245 at the Gaylord National Harbor hotel and
conference center was the largest gathering of astronomers in
history. More than 3,693 attendees enjoyed 1,085 sessions, 17 invited
and prize talks, and a wide range of affiliated content. It was a
burst of energy for our field… and little did we know how much we
would need that energy in the coming months.

January, February, and March brought a flurry of public policy
actions, executive orders, and draft budget proposals that knocked
much of the scientific community back on its heels. Proposals to cut
the National Science Foundation (NSF) in half, decimate NASA
astrophysics, and negatively impact science across the board were
truly gut-wrenching. At the AAS, we undertook scenario planning to
prepare for whatever might come our way. This process was tremendously
valuable and, when things began to not turn out as bad as they were
proposed (we are not out of the woods yet!), we were ready to adjust
as needed.

Although many grants that were undertaking useful and valuable work to
enhance participation in science were canceled, most research grants
were left untouched. The House and Senate have rejected the
president’s proposed draconian cuts to NSF and NASA, and we await
passage of the final funding package. We, the AAS, and the entire
scientific enterprise, are still concerned with what may transpire in
the coming months, but we are ready and engaged. We are undertaking
policy actions we have not previously considered, such as joining
other organizations to file amicus briefs to inform lawsuits against
the administration, significantly increasing our advocacy efforts by
our members and with our professional staff, and partnering with a
wider range of organizations in advocacy than we ever have before.

Summer saw us meeting in Alaska, and although the meeting was quite a
bit smaller than our January meeting, it performed well, and the
consensus among attendees was that the meeting was valuable to them
personally.

Throughout the year, the number of submissions to our journals has
been running roughly 20% higher than last year. We are on track to
exceed 9,200 submissions to our journals for 2025. For comparison, the
years 2018–2023 saw us grow from roughly 6,000 submissions to 6,700
submissions. Clearly, we are doing something right with our journals,
as even with this substantial growth, the quality of the manuscripts
has not declined, and our acceptance rate remains where it has been
for years.

Our long-serving AAS Journals Editor in Chief, Ethan Vishniac,
announced his retirement as of August 2027, and a search committee is
working to take the pulse of the publishing landscape, define the
position clearly, and recruit his replacement.

We had a useful gathering of our Division leadership this fall, where
they shared their successes and challenges with each other and with
AAS leadership.  New ideas and partnerships resulted, and we look
forward to seeing how these come to fruition, like the Laboratory
Astrophysics Division’s intention to meet with Divisions over time to
demonstrate the fundamental value of laboratory astrophysics to all
our sub-disciplines.

Finally, although we budgeted for a very small AAS 247, fearing the
worst, the meeting will be close to a normal-sized January AAS
meeting, with all the vibrant content and sessions we have come to
expect. As of this writing, we have more than 2,700 registrants. I
look forward to seeing some of you in Phoenix for what will be a great
conference!

Other accomplishments and details will appear in the 2025 annual
report, so let me again thank the AAS leadership, members, authors,
and staff who have accomplished so much in 2025 and will do so in 2026
and beyond. The AAS continues to outperform as we strive to fulfill
our mission to enhance and share humanity’s knowledge of the universe!

As 2025 comes to an end, I want to thank you for being part of the AAS
community during a year of both challenge and achievement, and wish
you a happy holiday season!

     — Kevin Marvel, CEO


