
March 2024
       
----------------------------------------------------------------------

             SUGGESTIONS TO IMPROVE PRESENTATIONS
                      FROM A8500 STUDENTS


   Present material at a comfortable pace; don't speak too fast or
   rush through the slides.  Rehearsals will tell you when you have to
   pare the amount of material presented.

   Look at the audience, not the screen or your laptop.

   Don't read from the slides or your notes.  Use those only
   as prompts.

   Consciously avoid using "filler" words ("um," "uh," "like," "you
   know," etc); think ahead so you deliver ideas clearly and smoothly.
   Rehearsals are a big help here.

   Don't fidget or move around too much; don't use repetitive
   gestures.  Don't block the screen unless you intend that while
   pointing something out.

   Don't overcrowd slides.

   Streamline text on slides -- don't be wordy.  Abbreviate but
   maintain clarity.  It's hard for the audience to read a big block
   of text and listen at the same time.  But be sure all the main
   points you deliver verbally are also shown in text on the slides.

   Light text on a dark background is easiest to read under most
   circumstances.  But dark text on a white background often
   makes it easier to incorporate figures from the literature.
   You may need to experiment. 

   Describe the content (axes, symbols, source, etc) of a figure when
   first shown; then provide complete interpretation of the figure and
   its implications/significance.

   Be sure figures and images are shown at easily viewable scale.  Add
   labels and captions for clarification, as needed.  Good practice is
   to include a brief caption that summarizes the content of each
   figure.

   Be sure room lights are lowered so that the audience can easily
   view your slides.  Particularly important with lower contrast
   image material. 

   Equations will often benefit from explanatory labels or "speech
   bubbles."

   Explain abbreviations, acronyms, and other special nomenclature when
   first encountered -- preferably as text on slides.

   Listen to yourself.  Speak clearly and loudly enough to easily
   reach the back of the room.  Be conscious of your intonation and
   vary it.  (In larger rooms, always use a microphone if available.)

   Leave your summary slide on the screen at the end of the talk so
   people can absorb it or refer to it during questions.  Don't
   use "Thank you!"-type slides.

   During questions, try not to scroll through slides on the screen.
   Use "Presenter View" (PowerPoint) or other tools that allow you to
   jump directly to selected slides.

   Practice the presentation in real time, more than once.  Expect
   that you will need to update both the conceptual flow and your
   slides for time and clarity.  Try to view your presentation as an
   audience member would.  Your rehearsals should include formulating
   answers to all the likely questions, especially skeptical ones,
   from your audience.

   It can be a big help to actually memorize the first minute or two
   of an important presentation.  This gets you off to a good start.  

   Consult the several versions of "How to Give A Bad Talk" posted
   for earlier incarnations of ASTR 8500.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
