
Op-ed article in the LA Times:


COMMENTARY


           CONGRESS CAN KEEP OUR EYE ON THE UNIVERSE OPEN

        By John Bahcall, Christopher McKee and Joseph Taylor

John Bahcall is a professor of astrophysics at the Institute for
Advanced Study at Princeton and recipient of the National Medal of
Science. Christopher McKee is professor of physics and astronomy and
former chair of physics at UC Berkeley. Joseph Taylor is a professor of
physics at Princeton and was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1993.
[These individuals also chaired the last two decade survey committees 
for astronomy.]


February 23, 2005

The president has crafted a budget that does not fund the long-planned
final repair mission for the Hubble Space Telescope. Congress now faces
a historic decision: If money is not restored to fix Hubble, then one of
the world's most productive scientific instruments will forever close
its eye on the universe. What is at stake is not only a piece of stellar
technology but our commitment to the most fundamental human quest:
understanding the cosmos. The Hubble telescope is a national asset, an
inspiration to young scientists-in-the-making and an orbiting workhorse
in the prime of its life. It has given us riveting, ravishing pictures
of solar systems at birth, galaxies colliding and the death throes of a
star in supernova. It has measured the rate of the universe's expansion,
pinpointed the origins of gamma ray flashes, proved the existence of
monster black holes and more. And yet, as staggering as such revelations
have been over the last 15 years, Hubble's most important discoveries
could be in the future.

Behind the Hubble budget cut is a debate over whether another shuttle
service mission (there have already been four ) is too expensive, too
dangerous, or both. NASA asked a National Academy of Sciences panel to
advise it on Hubble's future, and the answer came back: Service Hubble
and use the shuttle to do it. And according to former NASA Administrator
Sean O'Keefe, who left the agency just last week, the cost for the
repair mission has long been a part of the agency's budget.

Among the alternatives the panel considered was a robotic repair
mission, but the costs would be comparable and the robot option has a
major drawback ? there may not be enough time to develop the necessary
technology before wear and age shut the telescope down for good.

A new satellite that could carry some Hubble-type instruments was
another option. But Big Science progresses through a system of peer
review to select a small fraction of proposed new projects to implement.
It would be premature to push for a Hubble replacement ahead of other
projects. In the meantime, it would be irresponsible to throw away
Hubble years before a new telescope could even be put in place.

In the wake of the Columbia shuttle disaster, some NASA officials have
said publicly that astronaut safety is a reason for not servicing the
Hubble with a shuttle flight. A group of 26 retired astronauts, however,
disagreed in a written statement. According to one astronaut, if NASA
thinks the shuttle isn't safe enough to service the Hubble, then the
shuttle should be mothballed, and NASA isn't contemplating that. Nor is
NASA ignoring the president's call for manned missions well beyond Earth
orbit, which will be much more dangerous than servicing Hubble.

The Hubble telescope is the most successful science project in NASA
history, and if it can be derailed then no such project at NASA is safe.
And yet this work should be NASA's main order of business. Simply put,
it is science that sustains the agency, as it revolutionizes our
understanding of the universe.

In 1976, another president zeroed-out the funding for what was then
called the Large Space Telescope, but Congress thought better of it, and
the Hubble was launched. Now a tally of the costs and the benefits
clearly support keeping Hubble operational. It's time for Congress to
act again.

Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times

