
  News

Nature 435, 4 (5 May 2005) | doi: 10.1038/435004b


    Hubble rescue mission gears up despite shuttle setback

Tony Reichhardt, Washington

The space shuttle Discovery will have to wait at least another seven
weeks before returning to duty, NASA decided last week. But preparations
for an astronaut servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope will
resume anyway ? another sign that new NASA administrator Michael Griffin
may reverse his predecessor's decision to abandon the telescope later in
the decade.

NASA managers reluctantly revised Discovery's launch date from 22 May
for several reasons, but primarily because of concerns about ice debris
from the shuttle's giant fuel tank. The 2003 demise of Columbia, the
last shuttle to fly, occurred after foam insulation falling from the
tank shortly after launch gouged a hole in the shuttle's wing. NASA
engineers consider foam the greatest danger, but a technical review last
week concluded that falling ice still poses a small risk. So heaters
will probably be installed to prevent ice forming on the tank ? a
time-consuming job.

The next available launch window for the shuttle ? determined by factors
ranging from the International Space Station's orbit to lighting
conditions for cameras to inspect the vehicle as it leaves the launch
pad ? opens on 13 July and lasts until 31 July.

Meanwhile, engineers at the agency's Goddard Space Flight Center in
Maryland will resume planning for the shuttle servicing mission to
Hubble that was suspended by former administrator Sean O'Keefe.

Griffin won't decide whether to approve the mission until after the
shuttle's return, but said last week that he wanted to keep the option
open. Based on new estimates of when Hubble's batteries and gyroscopes
will fail, project managers now think that the telescope can be serviced
as late as 2010.

Griffin also said that, despite the delay in returning to flight, he
considers the 2010 target for retiring the shuttle "very firm", and that
NASA is looking for ways to complete the space station using other
launch vehicles. This could mean that the schedule for conducting
research on the station will slip.

For now, though, the orbiting laboratory will get what it needs from
elsewhere: a Russian Progress vehicle will deliver supplies next month
that the shuttle would have carried. And although the station's
international partners are disappointed by the delay, said programme
manager Bill Gerstenmaier, "they understand the decision".

Top of page <#top>

