 
 SPACE WATCH: BACKING A BAD HUBBLE DECISION
 
 By Robert Zimmerman
 UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL
 
 Washington, DC, Mar. 3 (UPI) -- NASA officials have claimed they 
 performed a risk analysis before deciding to cancel the last 
 space-shuttle servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope, but no 
 such analysis was ever done.
 
 Worse, sources told UPI's Space Watch that NASA also has ignored at least 
 one proposal to reduce the risk of sending a shuttle crew to Hubble -- in 
 order to justify its decision.
 
 Over the past few weeks, several NASA officials have stated publicly the 
 agency's decision to cancel further servicing to Hubble was made on 
 safety issues alone, not cost.
 
 At a budget briefing Feb. 7, Bill Readdy, associate administrator for 
 space operations, explained how cost was not a factor in the decision to 
 cancel the shuttle servicing mission, which was made public by former 
 NASA administrator Sean O'Keefe on Jan. 16, 2004.
 
 "I don't really think from a space operations standpoint ... or in the 
 mind of the administrator it was a matter of cost," Readdy said.
 
 Fred Gregory, the acting NASA administrator, emphasized this position in 
 testimony before the House Science Committee on Feb. 17.
 
 "Cost was not an issue as we evaluated whether (the shuttle) could go to 
 the Hubble," he said.
 
 Instead, these and other NASA officials claimed the decision to cancel 
 the last shuttle servicing mission to Hubble was made after careful 
 analysis of the risks involved.
 
 As Gregory told Congress, "Administrator O'Keefe made a very conscious, 
 deliberate and well-informed decision that the shuttle would not service 
 the Hubble."
 
 When asked by Rep. Sherwood Boehlert, R-N.Y., chairman of the science 
 committee, and Vernon Ehlers, R-Mich., for a copy of that risk analysis 
 report, Gregory agreed to provide it.
 
 Yet, one day later, NASA historian Steven Dick gave a presentation at the 
 American Association for the Advancement of Science annual meeting in 
 Washington, in which he described the process by which that decision was 
 made and revealed that, in fact, no formal risk analysis had been completed.
 
 Dick had interviewed all of the NASA officials who had been involved in 
 the decision to cancel the shuttle mission to the Hubble, a discussion 
 that came to a head in December 2003 when those officials had been 
 working on NASA's fiscal year 2005 budget.
 
 According to Dick's interviews, risk was the major factor in the 
 discussion, but the officials decided a formal risk analysis was 
 unnecessary. Instead, Dick noted, "The decision was made (by O'Keefe) 
 based on what he perceived was the risk."
 
 In other words, O'Keefe canceled the Hubble mission solely on his gut 
 feeling of the situation. So, the only way NASA can provide the House 
 Science Committee's requested copy of that risk analysis from December 
 2003 is to recreate it after the fact.
 
 As of Thursday there was no word on whether NASA submitted the requested 
 document.
 
 The lack of formal analysis was compounded further by NASA's refusal at 
 the time to consider a variety of options for reducing the risk of a 
 shuttle servicing mission.
 For example, according to an aerospace industry source, who wished to 
 remain anonymous, one company actually proposed using an updated version 
 of the module that was built in the 1990s to allow the shuttle to dock 
 with Russian Mir space station. The revised module would allow two 
 shuttles to link up so the crews could be transferred from one spacecraft 
 to the other in a shirt-sleeve environment, eliminating the need for 
 spacesuits or spacewalks.
 NASA's Goddard Spaceflight Center in Greenbelt, Md., which has had the 
 job of servicing Hubble since its launch, received this proposal in March 
 2003. Furthermore, NASA headquarters was aware of the proposal in 
 December 2003 when the discussions on Hubble's future reached a climax.
 
 Yet, NASA apparently never considered the idea seriously, even though 
 engineers had completed the preliminary design work and construction of a 
 revised docking module would have been far simpler and cheaper than 
 trying to send robots to Hubble.
 
 Instead, NASA officials repeatedly have acted as though no such option 
 existed, often describing how a shuttle mission to the telescope was too 
 risky -- partly because any rescue would require a dangerous spacewalk.
 
 For example, when O'Keefe testified before the National Academy of 
 Sciences in June 2004, he made no mention of this docking module option, 
 telling academy panel members that the only method available for crew 
 rescue was a spacewalk transferring "people while both orbiters are 
 flying in relatively close formation, across a tether capacity."
 
 Nor has NASA ever apparently considered the idea of using one of the 
 several available supply modules to supplement the provisions of an 
 orbiting shuttle. Once placed in an orbit close to Hubble, such a module 
 could be used as a supply depot for a damaged shuttle -- a form of safe 
 haven -- thereby extending its time in orbit and allowing time to launch 
 a rescue mission.
 
 Two such supply modules, the European Space Agency's Automatic Transfer 
 Vehicle and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle, already are under 
 development for docking automatically with the International Space 
 Station. The ATV -- the first of which is scheduled for launch this 
 coming fall -- is five times larger than a Russian Progress freighter. 
 Likewise, the Japanese HTV will carry 6 to 7 tons, and is scheduled for 
 launch in 2007. Both could be easily modified to allow a shuttle docking.
 
 It does not appear that anyone in NASA's leadership ever considered such 
 options. Instead, O'Keefe and others have noted repeatedly the only way 
 to provide a shuttle crew a sufficient safe haven while the agency 
 mounted a rescue mission would be to have it dock with the International 
 Space Station.
 
 As O'Keefe told the academy panel last June, "A stand alone mission .... 
 is limited to certainly not more than 17 to 20 days."
 
 That same leadership then spent a year -- led by O'Keefe -- pursuing the 
 far more difficult, risky and expensive robot-mission concept, something 
 NASA now admits was unaffordable, unrealistic and unachievable.
 
 In the end, the agency's arguments for abandoning Hubble were best 
 described by Rep. Ehlers during the Feb. 17 hearings.
 
 "What I see before me now appears (as) simply trying to justify a 
 decision (that was) made in haste and was not proper or appropriate," he said.
 
 For NASA and the American space program, this increasingly untenable 
 position is beginning to have a serious political cost. By refusing to 
 reconsider their decision and reinstate the shuttle servicing mission to 
 Hubble, NASA is undercutting its ability to persuade Congress to give it 
 money to build spacecraft to fly humans back to the moon.
 
 As Rep. Mark Udall, D-Colo., noted during those same science committee 
 hearings, "If we're unwilling to take the risks to go to Hubble, then 
 what does that say about (our willingness to mount) a moon and eventual 
 Mars mission?"
 
 Or as Boehlert remarked, "In a budget as excruciatingly tight as this 
 one, NASA probably should not get as much as the president has proposed."
 
 Unless President George W. Bush appoints a new NASA administrator with 
 the courage to reverse the Hubble decision, he is going to find it 
 increasingly difficult to persuade Congress -- or anyone else, for that 
 matter -- that NASA has the wherewithal to handle his ambitious space 
 initiative.
 
 --
 
 Robert Zimmerman is an independent space historian and the author of "The 
 Chronological Encyclopedia of Discoveries in Space." His most recent 
 book, "Leaving Earth," was awarded the Eugene M. Emme Award by the 
 American Astronautical Society for the best popular space history in 
 2003. E-mail: sciencemail@upi.com
 
