21 July 2003

John Bahcall, Chair
NASA Blue Ribbon Panel on HST Termination 
 and Transition to JWST


Dear John:

I recommend that the HST mission be continued until after JWST launch,
as long as there are no major failures not amenable to routine
servicing missions.  My reasons are, first, HST's unique scientific
capabilities and, second, the technical risk associated with JWST.

Astronomy today makes routine use of almost the entire accessible EM
spectrum.  NASA in particular is placing much emphasis on new
capabilities in the high-energy and infrared domains outside the
conventional UVOIR (100-1000 nm) band.  

But the fact remains that the UVOIR band contains the most information
about astrophysical sources.  UVOIR identifications/observations are
almost always prerequisite to a thorough understanding of cosmic
sources discovered in other EM bands, as vividly illustrated by the
avalanche of research on gamma ray bursts following their optical
identification.

The best performing UVOIR telescopes are therefore always critical
resources for astronomy.  HST will remain the premier UVOIR instrument
for high spatial resolution observations and access to the vacuum UV
(100-320 nm) for the foreseeable future.  HST-quality imaging at
wavelengths below 600 nm (and probably 1000 nm) will not be available
on JWST.  Nor is it likely that ground-based telescopes will be able
to duplicate HST imaging performance below 1000 nm within 15 years.  

Thus, the progression from HST to JWST is not analogous to upgrading
from, say, a 5-m to a 10-m ground-based telescope where the 10-m
offers improved capabilities across the board.  JWST will not supersede
HST's key capabilities.  

HST can be expected to play a central role in exploiting the 
rich harvest from the unprecedented array of deep surveys and
new facilities (e.g. ALMA) in progress for this decade.  It
is the only instrument capable of GALEX or FUSE follow-on.
It would remain a key asset well into the JWST mission.

Of course, it's difficult to predict how much essential science will
emerge from HST after 20 years of operations.  But the confirmation of
a Jupiter-like planet in the globular cluster M4 and the demonstration
of multiple star-formation epochs in the (ostensibly ancient) halo of
M31 are recent examples of science that could not have been done by
another telescope.  HST remains uniquely capable and productive after
13 years. 

I think the HST mission should be extended, with regularly scheduled
servicing missions and upgrades, at least past JWST launch.  I believe
the overlap with JWST is important because JWST is a considerably more
risky enterprise.  I am no expert here and have no special insights.
But we must acknowledge the finite probability that JWST will not
materialize because of a launch or deployment failure or for other
reasons.  The systematic descopes to which it has been subjected
appear to threaten its ultimate capabilities even if all goes well
technically.  In balancing costs and benefits, we should recognize
that investments in a robust, well-understood, and superbly performing
bird-in-the-hand like HST are less risky than those in nascent
missions.  

HST is now regarded by the public and Congress as NASA's most
successful scientific endeavor, second only to Apollo as NASA's
signature mission.  If HST suffers a major failure, so be it.  But if
HST remains healthy, it would be very shortsighted to shut it down.
Because HST's special stature sets it apart, your committee would be
justified in asking the NASA Administrator to fund a continuing HST
mission through a separate line which is not in direct budgetary
conflict with other science missions.

          Sincerely

             --- Bob

------------------------------------------------------------------
 Robert W. O'Connell             
 Hamilton Professor of Astronomy      Email: rwo@virginia.edu
 Astronomy Dept, UVA                  Phone: [434] 924-7494
 P.O. Box 3818                        FAX: [434] 924-3104
 Charlottesville, VA 22903-0818 USA   www.astro.virginia.edu/~rwo/
------------------------------------------------------------------
