The Washington Post

To Your Health 


  7,000 SCIENTISTS. 100 YEARS. ONE LIFESAVING TREATMENT.


By Brady Dennis 
September 24 2015 at 4:22 PM 


Here's the CliffsNotes version of how most drugs go from idea to
reality: Basic academic research provides the foundation for a series of
clinical trials, first in animals and then in humans, which eventually
tell us whether a new treatment is safe and effective.

But a study published Thursday in the journal Cell details how the
reality of drug development is rarely that linear or precise. Rather,
the path to creating a life-saving treatment can be an extremely long,
labor-intensive effort that involves thousands of scientists over many
decades.

Researchers at the California-based Gladstone Institutes, a nonprofit
biomedical research organization, retrospectively mapped the discovery
path of two drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration in
recent years: Ivacaftor, also known as Kalydeco, which is the first
drug that treats the underlying cause of cystic fibrosis; and
ipilimumab, also known as Yervoy, an immune therapy that has led to
remarkable survival rates in some patients with metastatic melanoma.

The researchers examined published citations and other "bibliometrics"
to unearth the incremental scientific advances that led to the two
drugs, and their findings underscore the vast landscape of research that
often lies behind a landmark treatment. They concluded that ipilimumab
resulted from research conducted by 7,000 scientists at 5,700
institutions dated back 100 years. Ivacaftor, meanwhile, involved the
work of 2,900 scientists affiliated with 2,500 institutions over 60 years.

"We were surprised," said Alexander Pico, Gladstone's associate director
of bioinformatics, adding that the web of connections revealed a "large
and complex network" of both individuals and institutions that
contributed to a drug's development. "It's more of a collective endeavor
than [we often realize] ... It really does take this network of
individuals over a long time to lay the foundation."

That's not to say every link in the chain is equal. Pico said
researchers noticed that certain scientists played an integral role in
the path toward discovery -- they were labeled "elite performers" --
while others played a more minor role.

"We're not claiming that every paper in this network has a direct and
obvious connection to the final drug," he said. "But that's also kind of
the point -- that basic research has to explore peripheral topics in
order to narrow down and lead to the final drug development. It takes
exploratory research on a wide range of topics."

Pico said he hopes the project will, in this age of shrinking government
budgets, remind people that the seeds of future cures are often sown
through investment in basic scientific research. In addition, he said he
and other researchers hope the effort will be the first step toward
"predictive" metrics that could help society make smarter decisions
about who and what to fund, eventually speeding up the path toward
discovery of new and important drugs.

