
American Geophysical Union 

------------------------------------------------------------------

HUMAN IMPACTS ON CLIMATE

The Earth's climate is now clearly out of balance and is warming. Many
components of the climate system—including the temperatures of the
atmosphere, land and ocean, the extent of sea ice and mountain
glaciers, the sea level, the distribution of precipitation, and the
length of seasons—are now changing at rates and in patterns that are
not natural and are best explained by the increased atmospheric
abundances of greenhouse gases and aerosols generated by human
activity during the 20th century. Global average surface temperatures
increased on average by about 0.6°C over the period 1956–2006. As of
2006, eleven of the previous twelve years were warmer than any others
since 1850. The observed rapid retreat of Arctic sea ice is expected
to continue and lead to the disappearance of summertime ice within
this century. Evidence from most oceans and all continents except
Antarctica shows warming attributable to human activities. Recent
changes in many physical and biological systems are linked with this
regional climate change. A sustained research effort, involving many
AGU members and summarized in the 2007 assessments of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, continues to improve our
scientific understanding of the climate.

During recent millennia of relatively stable climate, civilization
became established and populations have grown rapidly. In the next 50
years, even the lower limit of impending climate change—an additional
global mean warming of 1°C above the last decade—is far beyond the
range of climate variability experienced during the past thousand
years and poses global problems in planning for and adapting to
it. Warming greater than 2°C above 19th century levels is projected to
be disruptive, reducing global agricultural productivity, causing
widespread loss of biodiversity, and—if sustained over
centuries—melting much of the Greenland ice sheet with ensuing rise in
sea level of several meters. If this 2°C warming is to be avoided,
then our net annual emissions of CO2 must be reduced by more than 50
percent within this century. With such projections, there are many
sources of scientific uncertainty, but none are known that could make
the impact of climate change inconsequential. Given the uncertainty in
climate projections, there can be surprises that may cause more
dramatic disruptions than anticipated from the most probable model
projections.

With climate change, as with ozone depletion, the human footprint on
Earth is apparent. The cause of disruptive climate change, unlike
ozone depletion, is tied to energy use and runs through modern
society. Solutions will necessarily involve all aspects of
society. Mitigation strategies and adaptation responses will call for
collaborations across science, technology, industry, and
government. Members of the AGU, as part of the scientific community,
collectively have special responsibilities: to pursue research needed
to understand it; to educate the public on the causes, risks, and
hazards; and to communicate clearly and objectively with those who can
implement policies to shape future climate.

Adopted by AGU Council, December, 2003

Revised and Reaffirmed, December, 2007

-------------------------------------------------------------------
