
August 2013


    AMERICAN GEOPHYSICAL UNION STATEMENT ON CLIMATE CHANGE

/*Human-induced climate change requires urgent action. */

/Humanity is the major influence on the global climate change observed
over the past 50 years. Rapid societal responses can significantly
lessen negative outcomes. /

/“Human activities are changing Earth’s climate. At the global level,
atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping
greenhouse gases have increased sharply since the Industrial Revolution.
Fossil fuel burning dominates this increase. Human-caused increases in
greenhouse gases are responsible for most of the observed global average
surface warming of roughly 0.8°C (1.5°F) over the past 140 years.
Because natural processes cannot quickly remove some of these gases
(notably carbon dioxide) from the atmosphere, our past, present, and
future emissions will influence the climate system for millennia./

/Extensive, independent observations confirm the reality of global
warming. These observations show large-scale increases in air and sea
temperatures, sea level, and atmospheric water vapor; they document
decreases in the extent of mountain glaciers, snow cover, permafrost,
and Arctic sea ice. These changes are broadly consistent with
long-understood physics and predictions of how the climate system is
expected to respond to human-caused increases in greenhouse gases. The
changes are inconsistent with explanations of climate change that rely
on known natural influences./

/Climate models predict that global temperatures will continue to rise,
with the amount of warming primarily determined by the level of
emissions. Higher emissions of greenhouse gases will lead to larger
warming, and greater risks to society and ecosystems. Some additional
warming is unavoidable due to past emissions./

/Climate change is not expected to be uniform over space or time.
Deforestation, urbanization, and particulate pollution can have complex
geographical, seasonal, and longer-term effects on temperature,
precipitation, and cloud properties. In addition, human-induced climate
change may alter atmospheric circulation, dislocating historical
patterns of natural variability and storminess./

/In the current climate, weather experienced at a given location or
region varies from year to year; in a changing climate, both the nature
of that variability and the basic patterns of weather experienced can
change, sometimes in counterintuitive ways — some areas may experience
cooling, for instance. This raises no challenge to the reality of
human-induced climate change./

/Impacts harmful to society, including increased extremes of heat,
precipitation, and coastal high water are currently being experienced,
and are projected to increase. Other projected outcomes involve threats
to public health, water availability, agricultural productivity
(particularly in low-latitude developing countries), and coastal
infrastructure, though some benefits may be seen at some times and
places. Biodiversity loss is expected to accelerate due to both climate
change and acidification of the oceans, which is a direct result of
increasing carbon dioxide levels./

/While important scientific uncertainties remain as to which particular
impacts will be experienced where, no uncertainties are known that could
make the impacts of climate change inconsequential. Furthermore,
surprise outcomes, such as the unexpectedly rapid loss of Arctic summer
sea ice, may entail even more dramatic changes than anticipated./

/Actions that could diminish the threats posed by climate change to
society and ecosystems include substantial emissions cuts to reduce the
magnitude of climate change, as well as preparing for changes that are
now unavoidable. The community of scientists has responsibilities to
improve overall understanding of climate change and its impacts.
Improvements will come from pursuing the research needed to understand
climate change, working with stakeholders to identify relevant
information, and conveying understanding clearly and accurately, both to
decision makers and to the general public.”/

/Adopted by the American Geophysical Union December 2003; Revised and
Reaffirmed December 2007, February 2012, August 2013./

###

