
                       The Real Romance in the Stars
                                      
             by Professor Richard Dawkins, New College, Oxford
                                      
   Astrology is neither harmless nor fun, and we should see it as an
   enemy of truth, says Richard Dawkins, author of 'The Selfish Gene'.
   Why, he asks, do so many of us indulge in these pre-Copernican
   dabblings which are nothing short of wicked fraud?
   
   We should take astrology seriously. No, I don't mean we should believe
   in it. I am talking about fighting it seriously instead of humouring
   it as a piece of harmless fun. Frivolous tolerance, probably the
   dominant stance towards astrology among educated people who don't
   actually believe in it, ran right through a recent article in the
   Independent on Sunday by Justine Picardie, "Spinning after Patric's
   Star". As the headline writer put it, "Astrology has never been so
   popular, or such big business. But when the late, great (sic) Patric
   Walker (Libra) died, it wasn't just his billion readers - or his
   income - that attracted his aspirant successors; it was his reputation
   as the Henry James of horoscope writers, as the man who'd made the
   trade respectable."
   
   Hardly respectable, but surely something must be going on when even
   the Independent on Sunday can devote two pages plus a double picture
   spread to the question of who would inherit the mantle of a dead
   charlatan. Picardie's attitude to these well-heeled quacks ranges from
   affection (the Queen Mother's favourite astrologer is "roly poly") to
   something perilously near respect (Patric Walker is described without
   irony as "eminent") Respect might indeed be prompted by the wealth of
   these glitzy con-artists, which is lovingly dwelt upon (Chauffeurs
   whisk them in white stretch limos to fashionable restaurants where
   head waiters fawn over them).
   
   The popular scientist David Belamy, who ought to know better and
   probably does, contributed to Patric Walker's astrology page in Radio
   Times, writing that he has the "Capricorn caution" over certain
   things, but mostly he puts his head down and charges like a real goat.
   Such shallow light-heartedness sets a mood in which questioning
   astrology's validity is made to seem pedantic Gradgrindery. To ask
   whether the astrologers themselves believe in it also comes over as a
   bit long-faced, on the killjoy side. On Picardie's evidence, some are
   foolish enough to believe anything (One of them met Patric Walker
   "just before Mercury went retrograde" and immediately recognised him
   "from a past life"). The roly-poly one sounds a bit more fly and may
   understand exactly what he's doing, but it is hard to penetrate his
   high-camp posturing. Mystic Meg by all accounts could be the best of
   the bunch, an old fashioned crystal-ball toter, showing up the
   pretensions of the others, which is presumably why they try to disown
   her.
   
   The serious newspapers seem to be embarking on a self-conscious
   flirtation with astrology. Until recently they had nothing to do with
   such tabloid stuff. Then the Sunday Times succumbed and introduced its
   own astrology column, presumably with the excuse that it was just a
   bit of a giggle. The others haven't yet stooped so low, but some are
   acknowledging the pressure in more subtle ways. For the article by
   Justine Picardie the ostensible excuse was a story about financial
   success and succession. The same writer, incidentally, has followed it
   with an article on angels, again humorously open-minded ("There's this
   thing called going down in spirit"), teetering on the brink of
   outright respect for the lucrative profession of "angelologist" - one
   of them is an "eminent". Sorbonne professor of "philosophy" (which
   turns out to mean the usual "cultural studies" metatwaddle). There's
   this thing called being so open-minded your brains drop out.
   
   This year-end the Guardian commissioned various individuals to look
   ahead to the future. Tucked away among some real scientists,
   historians and philosophers is none other than our roly-poly friend,
   the "First astrologer to play Nostradamus on TV". Here are his expert
   views: "On 12 January, Uranus moves into Aquarius and it's the dawning
   of a new age. It will be altruistic, humanitarian, brotherhood of man.
   I'm really looking forward to this. The energy (he obviously doesn't
   understand what this technical term means) will last until November
   2008 because Uranus will be eight years in Aquarius and Pluto 13 years
   in Sagittarius. Thank God I'm Aquarius". And lots more in the same
   vein, which the Guardian considered fit to print. The Princess of
   Wales, herself an enthusiast for astrology as one might expect, has
   "got her Moon in Aquarius" and so has Tony Blair. "Could he do for the
   country what Di has done for the monarchy?" I have a better question.
   Why does a decent newspaper hand out free publicity to this phoney?
   Just a giggle, again? Or is the Guardian bending over backwards not to
   be elitist?
   
   On a moonless night when the only clouds to be seen are the Magellanic
   Clouds of the Milky Way, go out to a place far from street light
   pollution, lie on the grass and gaze out at the stars.1 What are you
   seeing? Superficially you notice constellations, but a constellation
   is of no more significance than a patch of curiously shaped damp on
   the bathroom ceiling. Note, accordingly, how little it means to say
   something like "Uranus moves into Aquarius". Aquarius is a
   miscellaneous set of stars all at different distances from us, which
   have no connection with each other except that they constitute a
   (meaningless) pattern when seen from a certain (not particularly
   special) place in the galaxy (here). A constellation is not an entity
   at all, not the kind of thing that Uranus, or anything else, can
   sensibly be said to "move into".
   
   The shape of a constellation, moreover, is ephemeral. A million years
   ago our Homo erectus ancestors gazed out nightly (no light pollution
   then, unless it came from that species' brilliant innovation, the camp
   fire) at a set of very different constellations. A million years
   hence, our descendants will see yet other shapes in the sky, and their
   astrologer (if our species has not grown up and sent them packing long
   since) will be fabricating their oracles on the basis of a different
   zodiac.
   
   A far more rapid astronomical shift is the precession of the
   equinoxes.2 My birthday (26 March) is listed in the papers as Aries
   but this is the sun sign which somebody with my birthday would have
   had when Ptolemy codified all that stuff. Because of the precessional
   shift of approximately one whole zodiacal sign over the AD era, my sun
   sign is in fact (if you can call it a fact) Pisces. If astrologers
   were doing something that had any connection with reality, this
   presumably ought to make a difference. Since they aren't, it doesn't.
   Scorpio could go retrograde up Uranus and it wouldn't make any
   difference.
   
   Actually, of course, only planets can "go retrograde", and even then
   it is an illusion. As they, and we, orbit the sun, planets will on
   occasion appear to reverse their direction from our point of view. But
   these occasions have no significance. From a third planet they would
   be seen to "go retrograde" at different times. Planets do not really
   "wander", and certainly not remotely near any constellation, which are
   the distant backdrops of our viewpoint. Even if "going retrograde" or
   "moving into Aquarius" were real phenomena, some thing that planets
   actually do, what influence could they possibly have on human events?
   A planet is so far away that its gravitational pull on a new-born baby
   would be swamped by the pull of the doctor's paunch.3
   
   No, we can forget planets going retrograde, and we can forget
   constellations except as a convenient way of finding our way around.
   What else are we seeing when we gaze up at the night sky? One thing we
   are seeing is history. When you look at the great galaxy in Andromeda
   you are seeing it as it was 2.3 million years ago and Australopithecus
   stalked the African savannah. You are looking back in time. Shift your
   gaze a few degrees to the nearest bright star in the constellation of
   Andromeda and you are seeing Mirach, but much more recently, as it was
   when Wall Street crashed. The sun, when you see it, is only eight
   minutes ago. But look through a large telescope at the sombrero Galaxy
   and you are seeing a trillion suns as they were when your tailed
   ancestors peered shyly through the canopy and India collided with Asia
   to raise the Himalayas. A collision on a larger scale, between two
   galaxies in Stephan's Quintet, is shown to us at a time when on Earth
   dinosaurs were dawning and the trilobites fresh dead.
   
   Name any year in history and there will be a star up there whose light
   gives you a glimpse of something happening that very year. Whatever
   the year of your birth, somewhere up in the night sky you could find
   your birth star (or stars, for the number is proportional to the third
   power of your age). Its light enables you to look back and see a
   thermonuclear glow that heralds your birth. A pleasing conceit, but
   that is all. Your birth star will not deign to tell anything about
   your personality, your future or your sexual compatibilities. The
   stars have larger agendas, in which the preoccupation's of human
   pettiness do not figure.
   
   Your birth star, of course, is yours for only this year. Next year you
   must look to another shell of stars, one light year more distant.
   Think of this expanding bubble as a radius of good news, the news of
   you birth, broadcast steadily outwards. In the Einsteinian universe in
   which most physicists now think we live, nothing can in principle
   travel faster than light. So, if you are 50 years old, you have a
   personal news sphere of 50 light years radius. Within that sphere it
   is in principle possible (obviously not in practice) for news of your
   existence to have permeated. Outside that sphere you might as well not
   exist - in an Einsteinian sense you do not exist. Older people have
   larger existence spheres than younger people, but nobody's existence
   sphere extends to more than a tiny fraction of the universe. The birth
   of Jesus may seem an ancient and momentous event to us. But the news
   of it is actually so recent that, even in the most theoretically ideal
   circumstances, it could in principle have been proclaimed to less than
   one 200-million-millionth of the stars in the universe. Many, if not
   most, of the stars out there will be orbited by planets. The numbers
   are so vast that probably some of them have life forms, some have
   evolved intelligence and technology. Yet the distance and times that
   separate us are so great that thousands of life forms could
   independently evolve and go extinct without it being possible for any
   to know of the existence of any other. The real universe has mystery
   enough to need no help from obscurantist hucksters.
   
   Scientific truth is too beautiful to be sacrificed for the sake of
   light entertainment or money. Astrology is an aesthetic affront. It
   cheapens astronomy, like using Beethoven for commercial jingles. By
   existing law neither Beethoven nor nature can sue, but perhaps
   existing law could be changed. If the methods of Astrologers were
   really shown to be valid it would be a fact of signal importance for
   science. Under such circumstances astrology should be taken seriously
   indeed. But if - as all indications agree - there is not a smidgen of
   validity in any of the things that astrologers so profitably do, this,
   too, should be taken seriously and not indulgently trivialised. We
   should learn to see the debauching of science for profit as a crime.
   
   I must make the usual defence against a charge of scientific
   arrogance. How do I know that there is no truth in astrology? Well, of
   course I don't know. I can't prove that there is nothing in
   horoscopes, any more than I can prove that there is nothing in the
   (rather more plausible) theory that chewing gum causes mad cow
   disease. There just isn't any evidence in favour (of either theory),
   and no reason why we should expect there to be evidence. It isn't as
   though it would be difficult to find evidence for astrology, if there
   were any to be had. It wouldn't take anything like that blissful
   cartoon in which a newsreader announces: "In a major breakthrough for
   the science of astrology, all people born under Scorpio were yesterday
   run over by egg lorries."4 A statistical tendency, however slight, for
   people's personalities to be predictable from their birthdays, over
   and above the expected difference between winter and summer babies,
   would be a promising start.
   
   For us to take a hypothesis seriously, it should ideally be supported
   by at least a little bit of evidence. If this is too much to ask,
   there should be some suggestion of a reason why it might be worth
   bothering to look for evidence. Graphology, as a means of reading
   personalities, is not supported by evidence either, but here the
   possibility that it might work is not hopelessly implausible a priori.
   The brain is the seat of the personality and the brain controls
   handwriting, so it is not in principle unlikely that style of
   handwriting might betray personality. It seems almost a pity that no
   good evidence has been forthcoming. But astrology has nothing going
   for it at all, neither evidence nor any inkling of a rationale which
   might prompt us to look for evidence. Astrology not only demeans
   astronomy, shrivelling and cheapening the universe with its pre
   Copernican dabblings. It is also an insult to the science of
   psychology and the richness of human personality. I am talking about
   the facile and potentially damaging way in which astrologers divide
   humans into 12 categories. Scorpios are cheerful, outgoing types, Leos
   with their methodical personalities go well with Libra's (or whatever
   it is). My wife, Lalla Ward, recalls an occasion when a more than
   usually brainless hanger-on approached the director of the film they
   were working on with a "Gee, Mr Preminger, what sign are you?" and
   received the immortal rebuff, "I am a do-not-disturb sign." We love an
   opportunity to pigeonhole each other but we should resist the
   temptation. Are you an introvert or an extrovert? Does your body shape
   betray an endomorphic, a mesomorphic or an ectomorphic personality?
   "The ectomorph is much more of an introvert and more shrewd and
   calculating".
   
   Personality is a real phenomenon and psychologists (real, scientific
   psychologists, not Freudians or Jungians) have had some success in
   developing mathematical models to handle many dimensions of
   personality variation. The initially large number of dimensions can be
   mathematically collapsed into fewer dimensions with measurable, and
   for some purposes conscionable, loss in predictive power. These fewer
   derived dimensions sometimes correspond to the dimensions that we
   intuitively think we recognise - aggressiveness, obstinacy,
   affectionateness and so on. Summarising an individual's personality as
   a point in multidimensional space is a serviceable approximation whose
   limitations can be measured and are known. It is a far cry from any
   mutually exclusive categorisation, certainly far from the preposterous
   fiction of astrology's 12 dumpbins. It is based upon genuinely
   relevant data about people themselves, not their birthdays. The
   psychologist's multidimensional scaling can be useful in deciding
   whether a person is suited to a particular career, or a couple to each
   other. The astrologer's 12 pigeonholes are, if nothing worse, a costly
   and irrelevant distraction. Lonely hearts advertisers frequently
   insert astrological references alongside relevant information such as
   musical tastes or sporting interests, and may even insist that the
   partner they are looking for must be, for instance, Taurus. Think of
   what this means. The whole point of advertising in such columns is to
   increase the catchment area for meeting sexual partners (and indeed
   the circle provided by the workplace and by friends of friends is
   meagre and needs enriching). It is nothing short of ludicrous then to
   go out of your way to divide the available number of potential
   partners by twelve. Lonely people, whose life might be transformed by
   a longed for compatible friendship, are deliberately encouraged, by
   their reading of astrological quacks in the newspapers, wantonly and
   pointlessly to throw away 11/12ths of the available population. This
   is not just silly, it is damaging, and the quacks concerned deserve
   our censure as strongly as their deluded victims deserve our pity.
   
   There are some stupid people out there, and they should be pitied not
   exploited. On a famous occasion a few years ago a newspaper hack, who
   had drawn the short straw and been told to make up the day's
   astrological advice, relieved his boredom by writing under one star
   sign the following portentous lines: "All the sorrows of yesteryear
   are as nothing compared to what will befall you today." He was fired
   after the switchboard was jammed with panic-stricken readers, pathetic
   testimony to the simple trust people can place in astrology.
   
   The American conjuror James Randi recounts in his book Flim Flam how
   as a young man he briefly got the astrology job on a Montreal
   newspaper, making up the horoscopes under the name Zo-ran. His method
   was to cut out the forecasts from old astrology magazines, shuffle
   them in a hat, distribute them at random among the 12 zodiacal signs
   and print the results. This was very successful of course (because all
   astrology works on the "Barnum principle" of saying things so vague
   and general that all readers think it applies to them.) He describes
   how he overheard in a cafe a pair of office workers eagerly scanning
   Zo-ran's column in the paper. "They squealed with delight on seeing
   their future so well laid out, and in response to my query said that
   Zo-ran had been 'right smack on' last week. I did not identify myself
   as Zo-ran... Reaction in the mail to the column had been quite
   interesting, too, and sufficient for me to decide that many people
   will accept and rationalise almost any pronouncement made by someone
   they believe to be an authority with mystic powers. At this point,
   Zo-ran hung up his scissors, put away the paste pot, and went out of
   business.""
   
   My case is that Randi was morally right to hang up his scissors, that
   serious newspapers should never give named astrologers the oxygen of
   publicity, that astrology is neither harmless nor fun, and that we
   should fight it seriously as an enemy of truth. We have a Trade
   Descriptions Act which protects us from manufacturers making false
   claims for their products. The law has not so far been invoked in
   defence of simple, scientific truth. Why not? Astrologers provide as
   good a test case as could be desired. They make claims to forecast the
   future, and they take payment for this, as well as for professional
   advice to individuals on important decisions. A pharmaceuticals
   manufacturer who marketed a birth-control pill that had not the
   slightest demonstrable effect upon fertility would be prosecuted under
   the Trade Descriptions Act, and sued by trusting customers who found
   themselves pregnant. If astrologers cannot be sued by individuals
   misadvised, say, into taking disastrous business decisions, why at
   least are they not prosecuted for false representation under the Trade
   Descriptions Act and driven out of business? Why, actually, are
   professional astrologers not jailed for fraud?
   
   Notes 
   
   1. This is carrying poetic licence too far in a Northern Hemisphere
   paper. The Magellanic Clouds are visible only in the Southern
   Hemisphere! R.D. 
   
   2. Many astrologers are aware of precession but, instead of updating
   their methods, they prefer the lazy escape of 'tropical astrology' in
   which one uses zodiacal constellations as labels for the patch of sky
   where they would have appeared years ago. R.D.
   
   3. The physics here is more complicated than can be spelled out in a
   general article. Two influences could theoretically be involved,
   direct gravitational attraction and tidal effects. In terms of direct
   gravitational attractions (which obey Newton's Inverse Square Law), an
   average doctor would be outweighed by all but the most distant members
   of the solar system. Tidal effects are another matter and they are far
   more important. They amount to distortions of the earth's
   gravitational field and obey an inverse cube law, instead of the usual
   inverse square law. The doctor's body would have greater tidal effects
   on a new-born baby than any heavenly body (see I.W.Kelly, J.Rotton &
   R.Culver, 1985, The Skeptical Inquirer, Vol. 10, No.2, pp 129-143.
   R.D.
   
   4. I am aware that this is a joke against `naive sun sign' astrology
   which is shunned by other astrologers. It is, of course, sun sign
   astrology's well-heeled practitioners in newspapers and on television
   that I am attacking as exploitative charlatans. If there is good
   evidence (i.e. better than the often quoted but non-robust Gauquelin
   attempt) that some other kinds of astrology work, well and good. I
   have to say that I'd be extremely surprised. R.D.
