 [Catalog Page Title Image]

                   Image Title:Very High Resolution Image of Icy Cliffs on
                               Europa
                     Catalog #:PIA01182
                   Target Name:Europa
             Is a satellite of:Jupiter
                       Mission:Galileo
[PIA01182]          Spacecraft:Galileo Orbiter
                    Instrument:Solid State Imaging
                  Product Size:912 samples x 384 lines
                   Produced By:JPL
                   Producer ID:P49632,MRPS87128
                 Creation Date:1998-03-02
              Primary Data Set:Galileo EDRs

Click on the image to download in  format.
For additional downloading options, please click here:

Original Caption Released with Image:
     This image, taken by the camera onboard NASA's Galileo spacecraft, is a
     very high resolution view of the Conamara Chaos region on Jupiter's
     moon Europa. It shows an area where icy plates have been broken apart
     and moved around laterally. The top of this image is dominated by
     corrugated plateaus ending in icy cliffs over a hundred meters (a few
     hundred feet) high. Debris piled at the base of the cliffs can be
     resolved down to blocks the size of a house. A fracture that runs
     horizontally across and just below the center of the Europa image is
     about the width of a freeway.

     North is to the top right of the image, and the sun illuminates the
     surface from the east. The image is centered at approximately 9 degrees
     north latitude and 274 degrees west longitude. The image covers an area
     approximately 1.7 kilometers by 4 kilometers (1 mile by 2.5 miles). The
     resolution is 9 meters (30 feet) per picture element. This image was
     taken on December 16, 1997 at a range of 900 kilometers (540 miles) by
     Galileo's solid state imaging system.

     The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA manages the Galileo mission
     for NASA's Office of Space Science, Washington, DC. JPL is an operating
     division of California Institute of Technology (Caltech).

     This image and other images and data received from Galileo are posted
     on the World Wide Web, on the Galileo mission home page at URL
     http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/ galileo.

Image Note:
     Orbit 12

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ordering Hardcopies:
     Please refer to our Vendors List for order information regarding this
     image.

                              [Navigation Bar]
