 [Catalog Page Title Image]

                   Image Title:Europa - Ice Rafting View
                     Catalog #:PIA01127
                   Target Name:Europa
             Is a satellite of:Jupiter
                       Mission:Galileo
                    Spacecraft:Galileo Orbiter
[PIA01127]          Instrument:Solid State Imaging

                  Product Size:1259 samples x 556 lines
                   Produced By:University of Arizona
                   Producer ID:P49434,MRPS86234
                 Creation Date:1997-12-16
              Primary Data Set:Galileo EDRs
                 Full-Res TIFF:PIA01127.tif (2 Mbytes)

Click on the image to download in  format (may be reduced in size for
conversion).
For additional downloading options, please click here:

Original Caption Released with Image:
     View of a small region of the thin, disrupted, ice crust in the
     Conamara region of Jupiter's moon Europa showing the interplay of
     surface color with ice structures. The white and blue colors outline
     areas that have been blanketed by a fine dust of ice particles ejected
     at the time of formation of the large (26 kilometer in diameter) crater
     Pwyll some 1000 kilometers to the south. A few small craters of less
     than 500 meters or 547 yards in diameter can be seen associated with
     these regions. These were probably formed, at the same time as the
     blanketing occured, by large, intact, blocks of ice thrown up in the
     impact explosion that formed Pwyll. The unblanketed surface has a
     reddish brown color that has been painted by mineral contaminents
     carried and spread by water vapor released from below the crust when it
     was disrupted. The original color of the icy surface was probably a
     deep blue color seen in large areas elsewhere on the moon. The colors
     in this picture have been enhanced for visibility.

     North is to the top of the picture and the sun illuminates the surface
     from the right. The image, centered at 9 degrees north latitude and 274
     degrees west longitude, covers an area approximately 70 by 30
     kilometers (44 by 19 miles), and combines data taken by the Solid State
     Imaging (CCD) system on NASA's Galileo spacecraft during three of its
     orbits through the Jovian system. Low resolution color (violet, green,
     and infrared) data acquired in September 1996, were combined with
     medium resolution images from December 1996, to produce synthetic color
     images. These were then combined with a high resolution mosaic of
     images acquired on February 20th, 1997 at a resolution of 54 meters (59
     yards) per picture element and at a range of 5340 kilometers (3320
     miles).

     The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA manages the mission for
     NASA's Office of Space Science, Washington, DC. JPL is a division of
     California Institute of Technolody (Caltech).

     This image and other images and data received from Galileo are posted
     on the World Wide Web, on the Galileo mission home page at URL
     http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/ galileo. Background information and
     educational context for the images can be found at URL
     http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/galileo/sepo

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ordering Hardcopies:
     Please refer to our Vendors List for order information regarding this
     image.

                              [Navigation Bar]
