Donald Savage
Headquarters, Washington, DC              February 22, 2001
(Phone: 202/358-1547)

Vince Stricherz
University of Washington, Seattle
(Phone:  206/ 543-2580)

RELEASE:  01-23

ASTEROID OR COMET TRIGGERED LARGEST MASS EXTINCTION
IN EARTH'S HISTORY, FORESHADOWING FATE OF DINOSAURS

     New findings provide evidence that Earth's most severe 
mass extinction -- an event 250 million years ago that wiped 
out 90 percent of the life on Earth -- was triggered by a 
collision with a comet or asteroid.

Over 90 percent of all marine species and 70 percent of land 
vertebrates perished as a result, according to the NASA-funded 
research team, led by Dr. Luann Becker of the University of 
Washington (UW), Seattle. The team's findings will be 
published tomorrow in the journal Science.

The collision wasn't directly responsible for the extinction 
but rather triggered a series of events, such as massive 
volcanism, and changes in ocean oxygen, sea level and climate. 
That in turn led to species extinction on a wholesale level, 
according to the team.

"If the species cannot adjust, they perish. It's a survival-
of-the-fittest sort of thing," said Becker, UW acting 
assistant professor of Earth and Space Sciences. "To knock out 
90 percent of organisms, you've got to attack them on more 
than one front." 

The scientists do not know the site of the impact 250 million 
years ago, when all Earth's land formed a supercontinent 
called Pangea. However, the space body left a calling card -- 
complex carbon molecules called buckminsterfullerenes, or 
Buckyballs, with the noble gases helium and argon trapped 
inside the caged structure. Fullerenes, which contain at least 
60 carbon atoms and have a structure resembling a soccer ball 
or a geodesic dome, are named for Buckminster Fuller, inventor 
of the geodesic dome.

The researchers know these particular Buckyballs are 
extraterrestrial because the noble gases trapped inside have 
an unusual ratio of isotopes, atoms whose nuclei have the same 
number of protons but different numbers of neutrons. 
Terrestrial helium is mostly helium-4, while extraterrestrial 
helium is mostly helium-3.

"These things form in carbon stars. That's what's exciting 
about finding fullerenes as a tracer," Becker said. The 
extreme temperatures and gas pressures in carbon stars are 
perhaps the only way extraterrestrial noble gases could be 
forced inside a fullerene, she said. 

These gas-laden fullerenes were formed outside the Solar 
System, and their concentration in the sedimentary layer at 
the boundary of the Permian and Triassic periods means they 
were delivered by comets or asteroids. The researchers 
estimate the comet or asteroid was roughly 3 3/4 to 7 1/2 
miles (6 to 12 kilometers) across, or about the same size as 
the asteroid believed responsible for the extinction of the 
dinosaurs 65 million years ago. 

The telltale fullerenes containing helium and argon were 
extracted from sites where the Permian-Triassic boundary layer 
had been exposed in Japan, China and Hungary. The evidence was 
not as strong from the Hungary site, but the China and Japan 
samples bear strong evidence, Becker said. 

The team's work was made more difficult because there are few 
250 million-year-old rocks left on Earth since most rocks of 
that age have been recycled through the planet's tectonic 
processes. "It took us two years to do this research, to try 
to narrow it down enough so that we could see this fullerene 
signature," Becker said. 

Scientists have long known of the mass extinction 250 million 
years ago, since many fossils below the boundary -- such as 
trilobites, which once numbered more than 15,000 species -- 
diminish sharply close to the boundary and are not found above 
it. There also is strong evidence suggesting the extinction 
happened very rapidly, on the order of 8,000 to 100,000 years, 
which the latest research supports. 

Previously, it was thought that any asteroid or comet 
collision would leave strong evidence of the element iridium, 
the signal found in the sedimentary layer from the time of the 
dinosaur extinction. Iridium was found at the Permian-Triassic 
boundary, but not nearly in the concentration as from the 
dinosaur extinction. Becker believes that difference is 
because the two space bodies that slammed into Earth had 
different compositions.

Members of the research team are Becker; Robert Poreda and 
Andrew Hunt from the University of Rochester, NY; Ted Bunch of 
the NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA; and 
Michael Rampino of New York University and NASA's Goddard 
Institute of Space Sciences, New York. Funding for the 
research was provided by NASA's Astrobiology and 
Cosmochemistry programs and the National Science Foundation.

Images are available at:
  http://www.washington.edu/newsroom/news/images/extinct

                          -end-

                            * * *

NASA press releases and other information are available automatically
by sending an Internet electronic mail message to domo@hq.nasa.gov.
In the body of the message (not the subject line) users should type
the words "subscribe press-release" (no quotes).  The system will
reply with a confirmation via E-mail of each subscription.  A second
automatic message will include additional information on the service.
NASA releases also are available via CompuServe using the command
GO NASA.  To unsubscribe from this mailing list, address an E-mail
message to domo@hq.nasa.gov, leave the subject blank, and type only
"unsubscribe press-release" (no quotes) in the body of the message.
