
From the introduction to "BROCA'S BRAIN" by CARL SAGAN

We live in an extraordinary age. These are times of stunning changes
in social organization, economic wellbeing, moral and ethical
precepts, philosophical and religious perspectives, and human
self-knowledge, as well as in our understanding of that vast universe
in which we are imbedded like a grain of sand in a cosmic ocean. As
long as there have been human beings, we have posed the deep and
fundamental questions, which evoke wonder and stir us into at least a
tentative and trembling awareness, questions on the origins of
consciousness; life on our planet; the beginnings of the Earth; the
formation of the Sun; the possibility of intelligent beings somewhere
up there in the depths of the sky; as well as, the grandest inquiry of
all-on the advent, nature and ultimate destiny of the universe. For
all but the last instant of human history these issues have been the
exclusive province of philosophers and poets, shamans and
theologians. The diverse and mutually contradictory answers offered
demonstrate that few of the proposed solutions have been correct. But
today, as a result of knowledge painfully extracted from nature,
through generations of careful thinking, observing and experimenting,
we are on the verge of glimpsing at least preliminary answers to many
of these questions...

This book is written just before --- at most, I believe, a few years
or a few decades before --- the answers to many of those vexing and
awesome questions on origins and fates are pried loose from the
cosmos. If we do not destroy ourselves, most of us will be around for
the answers. Had we been born fifty years earlier, we could have
wondered, pondered, speculated about these issues, but we could have
done nothing about them. Had we been born fifty years later, the
answers would, I think, already have been in. Our children will have
been taught the answers before most of them will have had an
opportunity even to formulate the questions. By far the most exciting,
satisfying and exhilarating time to be alive is the time in which we
pass from ignorance to knowledge on these fundamental issues; the age
where we begin in wonder and end in understanding. In all of the
four-billion-year history of life on our planet, in all of the
four-million-year history of the human family, there is only one
generation privileged to live through that unique transitional moment:
that generation is ours.

Ithaca, New York
October 1978


