Date: Thu, 14 Nov 2002 17:00:39 -0500 (EST)
From: NASANews@hq.nasa.gov
Subject: NASA PREPARES FOR "LAST CHANCE" METEOR SHOWER
Sender: owner-press-release@lists.hq.nasa.gov
To: undisclosed-recipients:;

Donald Savage/Nancy Neal
Headquarters, Washington              November 14, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1547)

---------------------------------------------------------------------

RELEASE: 02-221

NASA PREPARES FOR "LAST CHANCE" METEOR SHOWER

The early morning hours of Nov. 19 may be your last chance to see
the spectacular Leonid meteor shower in its full glory, according
to astronomers. 

"Even with the full moon, this year's Leonids will probably be better
than any other for the next hundred years," said Dr. Don Yeomans, an
astronomer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif. "If
you're ever going to see them, this might be the year to try," he
said. NASA is taking advantage of the event for several research
efforts around the world.

The shower is predicted to have two peaks, each a couple of hours
long, during which the most meteors can be seen. The shower's second
peak, most prominent in North American skies, is expected at around
5:30 a.m. EST Nov. 19, and promises the rare spectacle of a few
meteors every minute or even more. "Observers in good locations away
from city lights might see a few hundred per hour. You'll only get to
see the bright ones because the moonlight will wash out the ones that
aren't as bright," said Yeomans. Last year, observers did not have to
contend with the Moon and saw meteors at a pace of several hundred per
hour. 

An earlier peak is expected over Europe and Africa the night of Nov.
18, and observers in North America might see a few grazers -- meteors
skimming the top of the atmosphere -- from this first peak starting
around 11:30 p.m. EST Nov. 18.

The Leonids are grains of dust from comet Tempel-Tuttle colliding into
the Earth's atmosphere. Most Leonid particles are tiny and will
vaporize very high in the atmosphere due to their extreme speed (about
44 miles per second, or almost 71 km/sec), so they present no threat
to people on the ground or even in airplanes. As it progresses in its
33-year orbit, the comet releases dust particles every time it comes
near the Sun. Earth intersects the comet's debris trail every year in
mid-November, but the intensity of each year's Leonid meteor shower
depends on whether Earth ploughs through a particularly concentrated
stream of dust within the broader debris trail.

The dust that Tempel-Tuttle shed in 1866 forms the stream predicted to
give Americans a good show this year. Last year, people in Asia saw
the plentiful collisions within that stream. A dust stream from 1767
provided last year's peak hour of viewing in North America and will
provide this year's peak hour of viewing in Europe. After 2002, Earth
won't hit either of those streams again for decades to come, and is
not predicted to encounter a dense Leonid stream until 2098 or 2131.

The golden rule for watching the Leonids -- or any meteor shower -- is
to be comfortable. Be sure to wrap up warmly -- a sleeping bag placed
atop a lawn chair facing east is a good way to enjoy the show. Put
your chair in a clear, dark place with a view of as much of the sky as
possible. Don't stare at any one place -- keep your eyes moving across
the sky. Most Leonids will appear as fleeting streaks of light, but
watch for the bigger ones that produce fireballs and trails -- some
trails will remain visible for several minutes or more. 

The Leonids get their name from the constellation where they appear to
originate; the meteors will be radiating from the Sickle pattern in
the constellation Leo the Lion, which will be rising out of the
east-northeast sky. Don't look directly at the constellation, but at
the area above and around it. And, though you don't need them to see
the Leonids, a pair of binoculars could come in handy. 

Researchers think meteors might have showered the Earth with the
molecules necessary for life's origin. A two-aircraft campaign, led by
astronomer Dr. Peter Jenniskens of the SETI Institute and NASA's Ames
Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., will investigate this
possibility. "We are looking for clues about the diversity of comets
and their impact on the chemistry of life's origin on Earth,"
Jenniskens said.

"We are eager to get another chance to find clues to two puzzling
questions: What material from space rains down on Earth, and what
happens to the (meteor's) organic matter when it interacts with the
atmosphere?" said Dr. Michael Meyer, senior scientist for astrobiology
at NASA Headquarters in Washington.

On Nov. 15, a team of 42 astrobiologists from seven countries will
depart from southern California's Edwards Air Force Base on a mission
to Spain to observe this year's two Leonid storm peaks. The DC-8
Airborne Laboratory, operated by NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center,
Edwards, Calif., will carry high-speed cameras; a radio receiver to
listen to upper atmosphere molecules; and a team of meteor observers,
who will keep track of the meteor activity for satellite operators
concerned about impact hazards.

"This final deployment of the Leonid Multi-instrument Airborne
Campaign program promises an important and unique database for the
development of instruments targeted at in situ sampling of cometary
materials and for the future definition of comet missions," said Dr.
John Hillman, lead scientist for planetary astronomy at NASA
Headquarters. "It is hoped that these scientific data will provide new
insights for the comparative studies of comets," he said.

Although the meteors are harmless to people, there is a slight chance
that a satellite could be damaged if it was hit by a Leonid meteoroid.
The meteoroids are too small to simply blow up a satellite. However,
the Leonids are moving so fast they vaporize on impact, forming a
cloud of electrified gas called plasma. Since plasma can carry an
electric current, there is a risk that a Leonid-generated plasma cloud
could cause a short circuit in a satellite, damaging sensitive
electronic components.

NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md., is responsible for
controlling a large number of satellites for NASA and other
organizations and is taking precautions to mitigate the risk posed by
the Leonids. These include pointing instrument apertures away from the
direction of the Leonid stream, closing the doors on instruments where
possible, turning down high voltages on systems to decrease the risk
of a short circuit, and positioning satellites to minimize the
cross-section exposed to the Leonids.

Minimizing the threat meteoroids pose to satellites is the second
major area of NASA's Leonid research. From five key points on the
globe and from the International Space Station, NASA researchers will
use special cameras to scan the skies and report activity around the
clock during the Leonid shower. Led by Dr. Rob Suggs of the
Engineering Directorate at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in
Huntsville, Ala., the research is part of a long-term goal to protect
spacecraft from potentially damaging meteoroids. 

Using "night-vision" image-intensifier video systems and sky-watchers
outfitted with Palm computer software developed to record visual
counts, NASA engineers and astronomers will record their observations
for later analysis. Another tool at Marshall's disposal is
"forward-scatter radar" -- an early warning system built by Suggs, Dr.
Jeff Anderson, also of Marshall's Engineering Directorate, and Dr.
Bill Cooke, an astronomer at Marshall. 

"Our system is pretty simple," said Suggs. "We use an antenna and a
computer-controlled shortwave receiver to listen for 67 MHz signals
from distant TV stations." The transmitters are over the horizon and
normally out of range. When a meteor streaks overhead, the system
records a brief ping -- the echo of a TV signal bouncing off the
meteor's trail. Like the image-intensified cameras, this system is
capable of detecting meteors too dim to see with the unaided eye.

The research data from the Leonids shower will be analyzed to help
NASA engineers refine their forecasts for spacecraft; by better
determining where, when and how the meteors will strike, NASA can
improve protective measures to prevent or minimize damage to
spacecraft. 

For more information, including predicted peak times for major cities
and NASA media contacts, refer to:

http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/topstory/2002/1114leonid.html

-end-

