[Image]
[Image]

                                Double Whammy

          An asteroid striking land would be catastrophic, but the
           damage might be far worse if it crashed into the sea.

                One if on land, two
                if at sea. That's the  [Tsunami animation] Image: Edwin
                damage assessment for  Vigils, Los Alamos National
                an asteroid hitting    Laboratory
                Earth. Indeed,
                although an impact on  WASHOUT: This simulation shows a
                land would be          tsunami, generated by an asteroid
                catastrophic, a        impact in the Atlantic Ocean,
                watery one would be    inundating a section of the eastern
                doubly so. Reason      U.S. The waves would move far
                being, towering        inland to the foothills of the
                waves, called          Appalachian Mountains. Norfolk,
 MORE           tsunamis, would race   Va., the Delmarva Peninsula and
 EXPLORATIONS   outward and crash      Cape May, N.J., would be engulfed;
                down upon the          Washington, D.C. would end up on a
                coastlines, which are  tiny island.
                home to more than
                half the world's population.

                At least that is the conclusion drawn from recent computer
                simulations by researchers at the Energy Department's
                weapons labs. With real bombs falling out of fashion, these
                experts have kept their supercomputers humming by
                simulating enormous natural blasts. Last year, a group at
                Sandia National Laboratories tested a new computer by
                modeling the impact of an asteroid. Not to be outdone, a
                team at Los Alamos National Laboratory recently tackled the
                aftermath of such a hit. They revealed their findings at a
                meeting of the American Astronomical Society in early
                January.

                The most recent simulation, created by Los Alamos
                astrophysicist Jack Hills and his colleague Charles Mader,
                assumes that an asteroid three miles across slams into the
                mid-Atlantic, thereby creating a series of waves that
                spreads out from the point of impact. Tsunamis are unlike
                other ocean waves. In the open sea, they are an almost
                undetectable swell, often barely inches high. But they can
                travel thousands of miles in a matter of hours.

                 [Comet animation] When tsunami (from the Japanese
                 COMET IMPACT.     characters for "harbor" and "wave")
                 Scientists at     reach shallower coastal waters, their
                 Sandia National   velocity is slowed, and they rear up
                 Laboratories      into immense walls of water that slam
                 modeled a comet   into the shoreline and pour far inland.
                 striking the      The Los Alamos model shows that the
                 ocean.            waves created by an asteroid impact
                                   would drown the entire upper East Coast
                of the U.S. inland to the foothills of the Appalachian
                Mountains. Delaware, Maryland, Virginia and Long Island
                would be inundated--and all the coastal cities completely
                destroyed. The waves would also swamp the coasts of France
                and Portugal.

                Earth is likely to take a hit from an object that large
                only once every 10 million years or so. But the chance of a
                strike from a smaller asteroid is 2,000 or 3,000 times more
                likely, or once every few thousand years. The Los Alamos
                model shows that an asteroid a mere 1,300 feet in diameter
                would still cause enormous devastation, raking the coasts
                with tsunami more than 300 feet high.

                Asteroids smaller than about 600 feet across burn away and
                lose most of their energy in the atmosphere. But even these
                smaller strikes are far from innocuous. It was an object of
                this type that exploded in the air near the Tunguska River
                in central Siberia in 1908. The Tunguska shock wave
                flattened 800 square miles of forest; the force of the
                detonation is estimated to have been 1,000 times greater
                than the Hiroshima bomb.

                Although the accuracy of the Los      [Tsunami damage]
                Alamos models can be disputed, the    TSUNAMI AFTERMATH:
                devastating effects of tsunamis are   In 1964 an
                well known, especially to coastal     earthquake in
                dwellers on the Pacific Ocean. There, Alaska's Prince
                sudden changes in the level of the    William Sound
                seabed, triggered by undersea         triggered a
                earthquakes or volcanic activity,     Pacific-wide
                cause these frequent marauders. Like  tsunami. Damage at
                the waves predicted for asteroid      Seward, Alaska,
                strikes, the potential for damage is  included this
                spread over thousands of miles by the beached ship and
                waves propagating through the water.  demolished truck.
                                                      Overall the event
                In just one recent example, more than claimed 122 lives
                2,000 people were killed on December  and caused more
                12, 1992, when a tsunami flooded two  than $106 million
                volcanic islands in the South         in damage.
                Pacific, called Flores and Babi. By
                the time the waves swept ashore, they were more than 80
                feet high. Other tsunamis have struck Alaska and Japan. And
                some have occurred even in the less seismically active
                Atlantic Ocean. In 1929 a giant wave roared ashore in
                Newfoundland, Canada. Only 29 lives were lost--but only
                because the island was so sparsely populated to begin with.

                Scientists around the world are working on a variety of
                methods to provide real-time warnings when a tsunami is
                headed for land. One program, called CREST for Consolidated
                Reporting of Earthquakes and Tsunamis, was begun in 1996 by
                the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
                Eventually, it will consist of 60 seismic-sensing sites in
                the U.S. Pacific states. When the instruments detect
                seismic activity that could generate a tsunami, the data
                will be flashed to tsunami-warning centers. NOAA is also
                installing a network of undersea Bottom Pressure Recorders
                (BPRs) that it hopes will be able to track tsunamis in real
                time. Japan has a similar project under way.

                Hill and his colleagues are all in favor of the tsunami
                warning system, but they believe it does not go far enough.
                They advocate a similar system to track asteroids and set
                up missiles carrying nuclear warheads to destroy or deflect
                them before they endanger Earth. Although we can't do much
                about the restless motions of our planet, Hill believes we
                can fend off interlopers from the cosmos. He remarks: "An
                impact from the smaller asteroids is one disaster that is
                preventable."

                --Alan Hall, contributing writer

                RELATED LINKS:

                Tsunami! from the University of Washington

                The National Tsunami Hazard Mitigation Program

                Asteroid and Comet Impact Hazards site

                Near-Earth Objects Survey Working Group

                Spacewatch Project

                Near-Earth Object tracking

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
